good morning again ladies and gentlemen
it is with great interest and excitement
that we now open the formal part of
today's congressional colloquy on an
election held hostage and the October
Surprise what really happened this
conference the latest in a series of
more than 65 Capitol Hill conferences
held over the past 22 years under the
auspices of the fund for new priorities
promises to rival many of our previous
landmark events and its importance by
bringing to the attention of the members
of Congress important issues and dangers
to our constitutional democracy as
always this conference has been brought
to you under the sponsorship of members
of Congress from both houses a final
list the congressional sponsors who have
responded to the Dear Colleague letter
which has been circulated in both houses
the letter which was written by Senators
Adams Cranston Hawken and Wellstone will
be published at the end of this colloquy
with a unedited transcript after the
conclusion obviously of the proceedings
the conference is reminiscent of a
conference the fund sponsored on March
7th and 8th of 1973 that conference was
chaired by Senator Sam Ervin and
assisted by his assistant Rufus Edmisten
and the conference then was entitled
Congress versus the executive and at
that time we had 75 members of the
Senate out of a hundred who sponsored
the conference and we had over 200
members of the House response of that
conference the experience of today's
conference is somewhat different and
it's worth some consideration and
discussion but in any event that
conference actually led to the
structuring and the establishment of the
Senate Select Committee on Watergate and
one of the side bits that I've told
frequently at that conference was Roger
Mudd setting the
the scenes alongside me as Raul berga
talked at that conference about
impeachment it's in the Constitution
gentlemen and read the section on
impeachment and Roger Mudd turned to me
in the behind scenes whisper and said
pointing to the senators who were
arrayed on the panel and the other
congressmen and the words were do you
think this bunch of Pussycats will ever
impeach that SOB I said Roger whispering
back watch seventh is a historic day it
may not be seen plausible today but it
may be in the very near future it took
14 or 15 months after that conference
for actual impeachment proceedings to
begin to take place in the House
Judiciary Committee we have a different
situation today and we hope that we will
examine these questions with as much
property with as much care as is
required to serve today as moderator we
are most fortunate to have with us dr.
William green Miller currently president
of the American committee on us-soviet
relations
dr. Miller happens to be uniquely
qualified for this role from his
academic background as a BA at Williams
College in Oxford with specialization in
Middle East Studies and a distinguished
career in government service on Capitol
Hill where he has served as staff
director of the Senate Select Committee
on Intelligence from may 1976 to
September 1981 and a staff director of
the Senate Select Committee to study
government operations from 19 February
1975 to may 1976 the Church Committee
and a Stinton Foreign Service also from
1959 to 1967 but his qualification for
today's conference highlight his role in
November 1979 when dr. Miller served as
president caught his special emissary to
Iran in an effort to obtain the
least of the hostages then held in Iran
this mission actually led to the release
of the first group of 12 hostages from
Iran most Americans do not even remember
that today and on this note it gives me
great pleasure to introduce dr. Miller
and to set the tone for today's
conference I would like to quote from a
part of this week's New Yorker magazine
talk of the town
perhaps the most disquieting legacy of
iran-contra in which extremely serious
political crimes were exposed and then
left largely unaccounted for lassitude
in which charges that the president the
presidential election of 1980 was
compromised with the help of the Iranian
government evoked an almost bored
reaction it now appears that the charges
will be left to linger unanswered and
uninvestigated because no one within any
power sees it to be in his personal
interest to confront them that's the end
of the quote we as American citizens
cannot let this be dr. Miller this first
panel is aimed at establishing the facts
that are known about these circumstances
that have been set before you the
charges as we all recognize are very
serious and it the charges ours are of
such gravity the that they deserve
careful investigation the people here on
this first panel have been engaged in
investigation from the outside three are
journalists and Gary sick on my right is
uniquely qualified to examine this
question having served in the NSC during
the time these events took place and as
a Middle East scholar has looked
carefully into these issues
since that time the panelists will
discuss the facts as they have been able
to discover them in the course of their
work I think it will become clear that
there are many things that remain to be
answered and I hope that one outcome of
this panel will be to distinguish
between what is known and what deserves
to be known through proper investigation
through either Congress or the whatever
authorities are appropriate
Gary SiC has made it clear that he has
not yet come to any conclusions and it
seems to me in the spirit of fairness
that people who are here or are here to
see what the facts are and what is not
known and I would like to begin first
with Gary SiC who will lay the fact base
and then we'll turn to Christopher
Hitchens who's the Washington editor of
Harper's Magazine and columnist for the
nation then martin Killian who is the
Washington correspondent for deer
Spiegel and finally to joel Blythe's
columnist for in these times Gary why
don't you open this session well let me
just give a very brief background about
sort of how I got to where I am at this
point and and sort of where I think we
are as factually as possible I was
perhaps one of the most reluctant people
in this whole story I was in the White
House when the hostages were released at
that time there immediately began to be
rumors that something had happened that
there was some kind of a deal that was
struck I didn't think that that had
happened I didn't believe that you
needed to explain the facts that way
that they could be adequately explained
by Iranian internal politics and other
events and later I wrote a book on the
subject I never even mentioned these
rumors or charges I was approached in
the 1988 election when these this
subject began to emerge very strongly by
a number of people asking me to comment
on the thing
did I think that these charges were true
I recognize at the time that there were
certainly some new allegations that were
coming up some new evidence that had to
be taken account of but basically I
wasn't prepared to say that I thought
that the charges were true and curiously
enough even after the 1988 election and
all of this information had come out I
submitted a book proposal to the 20th
century fund to write a book about the
Reagan administration and and Iran and
didn't even mention this as a
possibility to be covered in the book
however as I started working on that
book I had felt that I had to start at
the beginning and I felt that I had to
resolve these issues in my own mind once
and for all because everything else that
happened between the Reagan
administration and Iran was covered if
this did happen it made a tremendous
difference in the way you analyze what
came later
so I began working on that as I was
working on a number of other issues at
the time as time went on and certainly
not just because of my own work that
certainly Martin Killian was crucial in
this he had done far more work than I
had and kept filling me in on new
information as it went along and in fact
is probably more than anyone else
responsible for why I'm here he may not
like that but that's but that is a fact
nevertheless but gradually as I worked
on the on the issue I became more and
more convinced that something had
happened I was building up a detailed
chronological base and things kept
falling into a pattern that I simply
couldn't ignore and then I began doing
interviews myself and gradually moved
from the side of those who dismiss the
idea entirely to what in my view now and
I say this in all seriousness there
really is no doubt in at all in my mind
that there were meetings between the
Republican campaign and the Iranians in
the course of the 1980 elections to
discuss the question of the hostages
that to me is no longer seriously in
doubt
the question is exactly how did it
happen and can this in fact ever be
proved and I'm not sure we'll ever have
full answers to either of those
questions let me outline for you from my
own perspective based on my own research
what I think happened
and the logic of what happened and then
we can go on from there I do believe
that the people in the Reagan campaign
or the Republican campaign really
because at the beginning of this thing
early 1980 there were several Republican
campaigns going on
they recalled mr. Bush was running
against mr. Reagan at that time and they
each had their own separate campaign
staff so I think both of them were in
fact interested in this issue at the
time but there was a very deep abiding
concern on the part of the Republican
campaigns that the hostage issue would
be exploited by President Carter at a
key moment in the election and upset
their campaign plans everything else was
going their way the numbers were on
their side in terms of the economy
President Carter was viewed as badly
wounded by not only the hostage issue
but a lot of other things that were
going on and I think the Republicans
felt with some justification that it was
their election that this was going to be
their time and if you're the campaign
manager you have to think what do i what
do I have to worry about what do I have
to protect myself from and I think they
looked around and one of the things that
struck them that they did need to
protect themselves about was the hostage
issue the fact that perhaps the hostages
could be released at the last second or
at a key moment and there would be such
a wave of emotional response from the
American people that it would overcome
the view of Carter as not qualified or
as someone they weren't going to vote
for and change their mind that it seems
to me was the essential underlying
concern then went on
from the information that I've been
given by sources who in fact said they
were there when these things happened
mr. Casey who became the campaign
manager for mr. Regan in February of
1980 within a month or two after that
probably within a month approached some
individuals who were plugged into the
Iranian circuit and who also as it turns
out we're providing information to the
US government these were men who had
been identified by the US government as
sources with good access into Iran and
they were providing information to us us
being the US government at that time
about what was going on
mr. Casey got in touch with them and not
to put too fine a point on it they
became double agents they were working
on one hand for the US government and on
the other hand they were providing
information to the people in the
Republican campaign I have this from the
fellow who did it and he and his brother
is dead but he says that he that's his
words he said we became double agents
working for both sides that led to a
major breakthrough in July of 1980 after
the Republican convention and after mr.
Reagan was nominated mr. Casey
I believed mr. Casey went to Madrid
where he met through the good offices of
these gentlemen that he had met earlier
he met with mr. Cooby who was at that
time a member of the intimate inner
circle of Khomeini and at that meeting
they talked about the possibility of
doing of some kind of an agreement about
the hostages mr. Cooby went back to
Tehran checked with presumably Khomeini
and about 10 days later came back they
had a second meeting and agreed that in
their view the Iranians would hold the
hostages and make a gift of them as mr.
Casey put it according to this source
make a gift of the hostages to the
incoming Reagan administration in return
for promises of political support
military
equipment unfreezing Iranian assets and
arms and the arms supply was to begin
fairly soon and to go on after they came
into office that was the nature of the
deal as I understand it that was done at
that time and the a number of things
happen in the period immediately after
that one the Iranians being good
bargainers instead of just taking the
deal came to the Carter Administration
and opened negotiations with us I think
now in retrospect to see if we had
something better to offer than what they
had been offered from the Republican
side we of course didn't know that
another offer was already on the table
so we were negotiating on the basis that
we thought we were only negotiating with
the Iranians in fact there may have been
a third party associated with the
negotiations we bargained rather hard
actually and in retrospect I must say
that it makes us look a little bit naive
we honestly didn't want to get into a
position of providing arms for hostages
as foolish as that may sound these days
we thought that was not the way it
should be done and so we bargained very
hard they asked us for arms we held back
we delayed we tried to give them only
partial information we tried to get out
of getting into a position of trading us
arms for Iranian hostages in the end
just before the election President
Carter agreed that we would return all
of the military equipment that Iran had
bought and paid for that was in the
United States that we would return that
but that pledge was not made until very
late in October and in the meantime we
had been bargaining if indeed they had
had a somewhat different offer from the
other side our offer probably didn't
look very good in any event the
negotiations went on with the Carter
Administration there was at the same
time a second rescue mission that was
coming to fruition that had been planned
by the Carter Administration
at that point it was there was no
intention of using it we were involved
in negotiations with Iran but the
hostage rescue mission was there in case
it was needed I think the Republicans
got very worried about that and that the
second rescue mission was going to be
used in late October to revert to
reverse the situation if nothing else
happened there were a number of reasons
why the Republicans had reason to begin
to get nervous again although the deal
had been done and my understanding is
that in mid-october they had another
meeting in Paris which was attended by
Republicans again mr. Casey the Iranian
group and a group of Israelis who were
present to review the deal as it stood
at that time and to make sure that
things were as they were supposed to be
as they came up to the the final days of
the election this was about two weeks
before the election
immediately after those meetings which
in my view took place about the 15th to
the 20th of October 1980 immediately
after that a whole series of things
began to happen very suddenly some of
the hostages were moved to different
locations as if they suddenly were
afraid that a rescue mission was going
to happen there was a secret shipment of
military equipment from Israel to Iran
which the Carter Administration in fact
learned about and complained to Israel
that they you know we're shipping arms
to Iran and they promised us not to do
it again but he came within 48 hours
after those meetings were concluded in
Paris there were a whole series of other
things that happened the modulus the
Iranian parliament that was charged with
responsibility for dealing with the
hostage issue went into a complete stall
at that point and everything came to a
halt suddenly nothing could get done
with regard to that and there were a
number of other things anyway there was
a very active period in those really 72
hours after what I think were the
completion of the meetings in Paris the
rest of the story you know quite well
the hostages were not released before
the
election Ronald Reagan won the election
the hostages were held detailed
negotiations went on with the Carter
Administration that we're getting no
place until 15 until the 15th of January
1981 at that point the Iranians
completely reversed themselves in effect
suddenly have after having bargained
very very hard with us four months from
November to January the Iranians
suddenly reversed themselves totally and
for all practical purposes paid us to
take the hostages back I mean that isn't
putting too strong a point on it that
Iran suddenly agreed to bring current
all of its loans which was a terribly
costly thing for Iran to do to resolve
the whole banking issue and it there
were some technical aspects but suffice
it to say that Iran completely reversed
itself at that point and as you all know
on the 20th of January we had completed
all the negotiations for the release of
the hostages at 8 o'clock in the morning
and all of the information was in Iran's
hands and they sat and waited until five
minutes after mr. Reagan had taken the
oath of office and at which point they
announced that they agreed to the terms
that had been worked out as of eight
o'clock that morning and the hostages
were released within a half an hour
thereafter as I say this did arouse some
suspicions at the time but it was you
know you could understand it does the
Iranians sort of taking one last twist
of the knife to Jimmy Carter and they
were quite capable of doing something
like that on their own what we didn't
know at the time and I haven't learned
until much later is that there was a
substantial flow of military equipment
that began almost immediately and it's
probably not too much of a an
exaggeration to say that as the plane
with the hostages took off from Tehran
and headed to freedom other planes were
loaded and taking off from Israel going
the other way with military equipment
the military equipment continued to flow
for some years after that time from
Israel and with the knowledge of the US
government
the this is not a supposition this is
something that that high officials in
the Israeli government haven't
themselves said publicly and to people
in the US government at the time who
have been interviewed on this subject
never say that this didn't happen they
simply say it wasn't me who was
responsible for hearing about these
forgetting the reports about these arms
that were being sent from Israel to Iran
and that's basically the structure of
the story what don't we know about this
we don't know a lot of things and my
suspicion is that a lot of things are
not going to be known I regard this as a
professional intelligence operation a
covert action that was done certainly
with the assistance and participation of
professionals they didn't I'm sure go
around leaving stray memos in their wake
I suspect that there were no photographs
taken of mr. Casey sitting with mr.
Karroubi in a hotel room in the Ritz
Hotel in Madrid and so forth I mean it
so if you're looking for a smoking gun
if that is what it takes a transcript or
a tape of the meeting of mr. Casey
talking to mr. Cooby
yeah I suspect that we're not going to
find that smoking gun there are many
things however that we could learn that
simply have not been available to
individuals who have been working on
this story on their own and with really
very limited resources some of those
things that we could learn certainly
there are I would like very much for
instance to simply look at the campaign
records up until now all of our efforts
to look at the Republican campaign
records have met a stonewall from mr.
Meese who is responsible for the
campaign records and he has refused to
let anybody have a peek at anything in
those campaign records which are out in
California now so that would be an
interesting place to start I would like
very much to look at mr. Casey's diaries
travel records and the like I think we
might learn
ideal and obviously if this isn't true
if it's that's where we're going to find
out that it isn't true we need to have
hard documentary evidence that says
either mr. Casey was missing on those
days or that he did travel on those days
or he didn't and if he didn't let's find
out about it I think that is but we have
to look at the records a simple denial
that I don't think he was I think he was
around all that week is not really
enough to take care of the issue it's
more serious than that
there are flight records we know the
tail numbers of some of the aircraft
that were involved in these operations I
would like very much to have access to
FAA records that would identify those I
would like to have passports subpoenaed
of certain individuals to see what the
stamps are on certain dates of travel
there are tapes that were made of mr.
Hashemi saris Hashemi whose who was
working as I say in effect as a double
agent his office was bugged during a
good part of that period this that is
now known for sure he was indicted later
on on the basis of those tapes where are
the tapes I would love to know what mr.
Hashimi was saying in his office and on
his telephone during that period of
October 1980 we've not been able to get
our hands on those tapes there are a
number of places one could look is that
going to solve all of our problems or
answer all of our questions
probably not but we're never going to be
able to even answer the basic questions
until we look at the material that is
presumably available and can only be
gotten through a subpoena so I will end
my lengthy opening statement thank you
Gary
christopher hitchens as a journalist
could you add to the the structure of
the fact situation and really address
the question from the point of view of a
journalist of what kinds of information
do you think would be important to know
for the public to know there's a
terrible character in a moria player
called mr. Georgia who is supposed to
discover late in life that he's been
speaking prose his entire career I find
I've been writing about the October
Surprise often without knowing it since
1984 when I got interested in the
belated discovery that there had indeed
been an attempt to destabilize President
Carter's reelection effort and that one
of the fruits of that destabilization
was the presence in the Republican camp
of his presidential papers in other
words we learned in 1984 that in
rehearsing for his debate with President
Carter governor Reagan rehearsed in the
same way as President Carter did that's
to say by reading President Carter's
briefing book you know words there was
prima facie evidence for some
skullduggery the word used for the
practice by David Stockman of the time
was filching other other more evasive
words were used by alternately amnesia
messes Cayce and Baker both said they
thought they'd got the book from the
other one a very unsatisfactory inquiry
was set up by Congress without subpoena
power without public hearings speaker
O'Neill was so anxious on behalf of the
Democratic Party that the American
electorate forget the name Jimmy Carter
that he helped to ensure that the
inquiry went nowhere but a professor of
America University here I became
friendly with at the time John Banzhaf
demanded that the be a special
prosecutor and took the matter to Judge
Hal green of this jurisdiction I decide
to question what judge green said in
replying to the hysterical campaign
mounted against the proposal for an
investigation of debate gave by the then
attorney general judge green accused the
Attorney General of utterly
misunderstanding the f
some government act and criticized the
notion established in prima facie
evidence in the investigation of debate
aid and I quote from the judge that
there had been an information gathering
apparatus employed by a presidential
campaign which uses former agents of the
FBI and the CIA that was the judge in
upholding that subsequently defeated
motion for a special prosecutor now I
just kept my files on the debate gate
matter which was successfully thwarted
and derailed as an investigation and
then read them again once I was able to
read the iran-contra testimony in other
words I read the two of them against one
another it's a course of action I
recommend to people who are interested
in this hypothesis because it it makes
the following supposition thinkable all
the evidence found by the al Bostick
committee that investigated the theft of
President Carter's papers showed that
the Republicans were principally worried
about the president's diplomacy in
relation to Iran that they'd set up
under the chairmanship of ed Meese and
Bill Casey what they they themselves
turned an October Surprise committee
there they had hired some acting some
former and some serving agents of the
Central Intelligence Agency and other
military organizations to monitor
airports airfields other centers to see
what movement there might be in relation
to Iran and to report back there they
had established moles somewhere we're
still in nowhere within President
Carter's national security apparatus
then we that that's all on the record
from the first forted inquiry from the
second derailed inquiry the iran-contra
inquiry we learned that there was
another unsolved matter which was when
did this iran-contra connection begin in
other words when did the Iranian bit of
it begin in the hysterically deceitful
press conference that he gave in
November of 1986 but attorney general
Meese sent everyone herring down the
opposite road the road that led towards
Nicaragua and towards the future and
blocked any attempt to answer them to
to ask the question when did your covert
military relationship with Iran begin
because if that question was to be asked
if for example it was to be established
that weapons were going to Iran in 1981
it couldn't very well be argued that
they were going to trade for hostages
because there were no hostages in issue
1 in Tehran and were not in 81 any yet
in Beirut nor at that stage was even
argued by the Republicans that there
were any moderates to deal with in
Tehran in other words the usual alibis
wouldn't do so this question in other
words could not be asked and it was
intriguing and sometimes entertaining to
see the lengths to which that question
was avoided as I say put that question
together with the evidence of funny
business in in the national ad campaign
that was already on the record and you
had a working hypothesis which I first
printed in 1987 now when people want to
change the savage in this country
especially if they want to discredit a
witness or a hypothesis the easy
recourses to the words conspiracy theory
about which I want to say little unless
you are a total moral and intellectual
Roza vest who believes that all facts
have the same weight and convey the same
values life is impossible without theory
there must be in other words the mind
must attempt to explain arrangements of
fact that the usual convenience term
used here as hypothesis if my hypothesis
was true that there was a thread linking
the debate gage inquiry to the
iran-contra inquiry and that it would
have taken the form of a bargain made
covertly between the Reagan campaign and
the Ayatollah if it were true I'd need
to find evidence in two places there was
no such evidence at the time but the two
places I'd need to find it work would be
in the fall of 1980
and in the spring of 1981 I would have
to find evidence that there had been
meetings between Reagan campaign people
and envoy's of the Ayatollah in the
fourth night in Asia and I'd have to
find evidence that had been arms traffic
between the United States and and Iran
in early Asia world
didn't have any such evidence at the
time so I confined myself as saying this
was a hypothesis it's in precisely those
two places that all the evidence has
since surfaced very largely due to the
efforts of Martin Killian and Gary's
sake but many others too
and I think it warrants one in saying
not that there is insufficient evidence
but that there is appallingly too much
evidence that this sort of skullduggery
took place I am myself very impressed by
the by the quantity and the quality of
the evidence I since I was speaking in a
personal capacity I can drop the polite
conditional tone that's been adopted
since their proceedings began this
morning and say I certainly have no
doubt whatever of what happened in that
case and I mean I'm impressed as Gary
SiC is in another connection by the way
that all evidence that turns up always
points in the same direction in other
words if there is a conspiracy the
evidence is taking part in it the facts
are conspiring and I'm certainly
impressed when facts conspire as they do
in this case now I mustn't ever run my
time but I thought one could summarize
by saying what we knew and what we
speculated was that an attempt to
destabilize the Democratic reelection
campaign in 1980 yes there was that can
be stated beyond doubt
was it the Iran hostage crisis that
provided the weak link for that
destabilize ation the answer to that is
yes was that fact known consciously by
the Republican campaign operatives yes
it was
whatever whatever might have been the
outcome of the 1980 election we know
from their internal discussions that
they believed that only a hostage
release could save President Carter from
defeat in other words the State of Mind
the mens rea a' is important
was there undisclosed contact between
reagan envoy's and iran E&N voice in
that period yes that is undoubtedly yes
did both sides after 1981 behave as if
they had made a secret understanding of
arms for hostages except in Reverse yes
the answer is that they did so behave as
if they've come to a secret
understanding
now was there sabotage of the hostage
rescue mission or missions I would say
we're not certain did Reagan know a
question people can't even bring
themselves to ask did the president you
notice people think oh let's not go into
that my answer is of course it's
impossible to prove cognition with
Reagan that's already been demonstrated
I have the feeling it probably was done
without his knowledge or consent and I
also have the feeling that the later
theory that untruthfully stated that he
had not been told and did not know which
he had been and it of the iran-contra
diversion was probably evolved as the
cover story in case they were caught in
1980 I think their elements of that
cover story were used for a for a later
scandal with only with only partial
success was the current President of the
United States and leader of the free
world in any way directly or personally
involved we can't be clear about that we
can be clear that some of his
subordinates in the world in which he
was best qualified that's to say the
world of our secret intelligence and
covert operations were closely concerned
and we do have an unbroken record of
lying by the president when he is asked
about the meetings he has attended where
either arms or hostages are discussed if
you look up Theodore Draper's history of
Iran Contra I forget the exact page
numbers but there are three pages which
handily summarize and condense the
number of occasions on which the
president has lied flat-out about his
participation in meetings where
unconstitutional arms for hostage in was
discussed in other words a presidential
denial of the sort that we recently had
from George Bush carries for this
purpose for the purpose of any
inflections serious investigation no
wait at all as as Gary SiC says now I'll
close on this poison hand over to Martin
all the all the fresh evidence does have
the uncanny Faculty of fitting the
hypothesis that I and some others have
been advancing since 1987 and if it were
true
would explain why it is that this
Republic occasionally rather more often
than is comfortable needs to convene its
Congress into special sessions in order
to find out sometimes what the
government is doing and sometimes who
the government is if we're to be
relieved of this distressing necessity
in the future it would be as well that
we actually with more respect towards
the recent past Thank You Martin Killian
I want to keep my remarks very short so
you people have enough time for
questioning and I think what I might do
is just if you should run down how this
started and where it is and the promises
and the problems of it because there
certainly are problems with it I started
working in this two and a half years ago
and it after a while appeared to me that
probably the problems of getting this
story home here in the u.s. were almost
overwhelming so we decided and by we I
mean the magazine because I have the
backing of my editors for that we
decided to go around in Europe a little
bit and in the fall of 1988 early
December 88 I was about to throw the
towel because I felt that the
information we had at the time people
like Richard brenneke and others there
might be something to that but it wasn't
good enough they were all so glaring
contradictions there were people who
obviously lied to us and so it didn't
amount to much and I think at this time
I probably would have given up had not
been for several trips to Europe low and
behold in Europe and we found several
people who gave us rather detailed
descriptions of what had happened in the
fall of 1980 the problem with them was
that they were not willing to go on the
record one of them as a matter of fact
um most severely threatened and at least
that's what he told us and he refused to
talk with us anymore but talking to an
intelligence official of form
intelligence official in France talking
to a German arms dealer who was very
very intimately connected to the Iranian
leadership
I came to the conclusion that either
something indeed had happened in the
fall of 1980 or there was a conspiracy
of lying
some kind of disinformation campaign to
besmirch or smear American officials who
had been in the Reagan Bush campaign in
1980 now even after two and a half years
I can't rule out that a lot of what
people have been telling me and other
people is not true but if you take all
what we have I think you have to be
really really paranoid to believe that
there are witnesses and informants on
three continents popping up over two and
a half years and that all of them are
supposed to be lying or all of muddies
informing let's get into the hard facts
the facts we have and I want to expand
on one thing which neither Gary nor nor
Chris have mentioned we do know about
the meeting October 2nd 1980 between mr.
Allen mr. Silverman and mr. McFarlane I
believe Richard Allen that he wasn't
going there to do any monkey play but I
think it would be very important to know
why mr. McFarlane importuned mr. Allen
to come to this meeting I would like to
know why then Senate Armed Services
Committee staffer brought an Iranian to
a meeting with two high-ranking Reagan
campaign officials and I would like to
know what they really talked about
perhaps mr. McFarlane could clear this
up and it's up to him perhaps to answer
that
the second hard fact we have is that yes
there was intelligence operation against
Jimmy Carter there's no doubt about it
with the AL Bostick committee report the
third hard fact all the weapons and I
think it's not just weapons from Israel
I do think you see a pattern of private
or semi-private arms dealers in Europe
in 1981 and following
shipping arms to Iran and it is very
well possible that even those operations
were connected to something which might
have happened the fall of 1980 the other
things we went to a high-ranking former
Germany Defense Ministry official who
told us that starting in 1981 stuff out
of NATO stores was shipped out of area
the Germans had to be notified of this
as the treaties require but they did not
want to know what happened to the stuff
we were talking big numbers of material
and have a pig it was either shipped to
Angola Afghanistan or Iran all three of
them the fourth fact and that is the
most interesting one and nobody has
talked about that in late July 1980
Richard Nixon was in London and the
London Sunday Telegraph reported that
mr. Nixon at that time tried to get
British ex commandos to help him free
the hostages in Tehran
now when the Sunday Telegraph a very
nice story approached the Nixon people
about there's a Nixon spokesperson first
sad we neither confirm nor deny it
later on they denied it I think they are
not telling us the truth
I think mr. Nixon was there I think he
talked about the hostages with British
officials and I think it should be asked
by the congressional panel if it ever
comes to pass what the ex-president was
doing there
one more point about George Bush I never
really thought that George Bush was in
Europe I think it's a it's a non-starter
I might be wrong but the question is not
whether the president was in 1980 in
Paris the question is whether people in
the Reagan Bush campaign met in Paris
Madrid Zurich and Brawley Frankfurt with
Iranians and I hope that we will have
more in the next six to eight months
I think we have to be very patient and I
am prepared I'm still prepared at this
late date that the whole thing is
nothing but a huge disinformation
campaign but it would be hard be very
hard-pressed to believe that thank you a
[Applause]
job life is pleased in 1980 private
citizens connected with the reagan-bush
campaign made a deal with
representatives the ayatollah khomeini
to delay the release of 52 American
hostages held in Iran
until after the election in order to
ensure that Carter would not win the
election with the last-minute rly to
that release of the hostages in return
the campaign guaranteed the delivery of
weapons and spare parts that Iran
desperately needed for its war against
Iraq for four years I have been writing
about this using the adjective alleged
to profess the word deal but let's not
kid ourselves I firmly believe that
happened
read through the nine 186 page
collection of documents and news
clippings that David Marks has compiled
for you that's at the front door or read
the 2413 page al basta report on the
theft of President Carter's briefing
books prepared by the House Committee on
post office and civil service those 2413
pages provide some details of an
intelligence operation that entailed in
addition to the theft theft of Carter's
debate briefing notebooks the creation
of to October Surprise groups within the
campaign one of those groups headed by
William Casey included Richard Wirthlin
Pete Daley and Admiral Garrick the other
which was headed by Richard Allen
included Fred ichael John layman and
Admiral Thomas Moore on page 57 of the
report the committee describes how it
was informed that a quote highly played
member highly placed member of the u.s.
intelligence committee with links to the
Reagan Bush campaign leaked to the press
information about a deal being
negotiated in October 1980 between
Carter and Iranian president Bani Sadr
that would have traded hostages for
spare parts at least in part the report
goes on to say that the committee looked
into this allegations but decided not to
publish the results of that inquiry
because it could not
the identity of this highly placed
member of the US intelligence committee
in light of the current charges perhaps
staff reports from the Abbasid
investigation should be resurrected and
on a speculative note perhaps the
relevant congressional committee should
now probe the actions during 1980 of two
highly placed members in the US
Intelligence Committee a death who
worked in the Carter White House and
went on to see their careers prosper in
the Reagan and then Bush
administration's Robert Gates who in
1980 was a top aide to CIA directors
Stansfield Turner and Donald Gregg who
was CIA liaison to the National Security
Council the affidavits and volume 2 of
the apostille report are also of
interest there you'll find an outbreak
of collective memory law similar to that
which plagued those who brought this
country at Watergate and Iran contra
from Richard Allen to margaret Tutwiler
to George will youwill who you will
remember prepped Reagan for his October
28th debate with Carter no one has been
able to recall how the dude carded a
briefing books found their way out of
the White House and into the hands of
Public Citizen Ronald Reagan the
question now before Congress is whether
in addition to stealing Carter's
briefing notebooks this cabal of
would-be presidents and their friends
stole the 1980 election a good number of
people let's look at some facts a good
number of people claimed knowledge of a
series of October meetings in Paris
where details of the deal were worked
out among those who are alleged to have
been at that meeting are William Casey
George Bush and Donald Gregg at the time
a US official a man who would later
express interest in resupply in the
copters these meetings are alleged to
have taken place two weeks before what
was a very close election so one would
expect the campaign records would be
able to explain where campaign manager
Casey and vice presidential candidate
George Bush were on the days in question
the Bush administration tried to explain
just that last year when the Justice
Department charged Portland arms dealer
Richard brenneke with making false
declarations in court in the fall of
1988 Reagan the key had testified before
a federal judge that he was present at a
Paris meeting where details of the deal
were being hammered out the US attorney
prosecuting brenneke last year sought to
prove brenneke was lying by providing
alibis for Casey Greg and Bush
but the government failed to come up
with a satisfactory alibis for all three
and in the end the jury unanimously
found brenneke not guilty Gregg in fact
left his ambassador's residence in Seoul
South Korea and went to Portland as a
government witness Gregg told the court
that he was on Bethany Beach in Delaware
and offered as proof photos of him his
fan and his family basking in the Sun
the problem for Gregg was that according
to US weather service satellite photos
it was cloudy that weekend
as for Bush's alibi you can take your
pick the Paris meetings are said to have
taken place on October 18th and 19th
1980 perhaps October 20th during that
weekend
two weeks before what was a very close
election candidate Bush disappeared from
public view for 20 hours enough time to
jet to Paris attend a meeting and jet
back at least hypothetically where was
George the Bush administration has been
working overtime to provide an alibi but
these overeager efforts apparently have
not been coordinated in the fall of 1988
Republican presidential campaign workers
explained that Bush spent these
unaccounted hours at the Chevy Chase
Country Club on private business that
story was supported by a heavily
redacted Secret Service report that said
Bush was at the club with unknown
parties in May 1990 at the brenneke
trial for this report again surfaced the
Justice Department offered to Secret
Service agents as witnesses to explain
Bush's whereabouts with unconvincing
lackluster testimony the two had trouble
making their case on October 22nd 1991 a
few days after Gary six-piece appeared
in The New York Times and Robert Perry's
frontline documentary aired on PBS vice
president Quayle was asked in Detroit's
ABC TV affiliate where Bush was that
weekend in October Quayle said he didn't
know but that he promised to get back to
the station with an answer the next day
the vice president's office faxed a Bush
itinerary which stated that on Sunday
October 19th Bush spent all day at home
in Washington without a Secret Service
escort on May 8 the Wall Street
Journal's Gordon kovetz provided a third
Bush itinerary for his lost weekend
Kovas wrote Sunday Washington DC lunch
with Supreme Court justice Potter
Stewart and mrs. too
this alibi originates with the Secret
Service which several months ago
provided that information to the
Government Accounting Office apparently
brenton was the Supreme Court justice
looks more presidential than an
overnight visit to a Washington country
club with private with parties unknown
further the brunch with the Stewart's
cannot be confirmed the judge is dead
and his wife suffers a chronic memory
loss also on May 8 Geri separ of The
Washington Times weighed in with the
fourth alibi he reported Bush was at
home with a Secret Service escort unlike
the previous Quayle alibi which said the
Secret Service wasn't present sefirot
quote The Secret Service says he awoke
at about 6:30 Sunday had lunch at his
Washington home and spent the day there
preparing a speech to the Zionist
Organization of America in Washington
the three other brief points to consider
that have been brought up before
something happened between October 11th
and October 22nd that caused Iran and
its ongoing negotiations with the Carter
Administration to drop the demand that
would have linked the release of
hostages to the guarantee that the US
would supply Iran with spare parts that
it desperately needed for its war with
Iraq the hostages as has been said were
released moments after Reagan was sworn
in and u.s. arms started flowing to Iran
immediately thereafter did this deal
take place the allegation should at
least be investigated with the same
thoroughness and I would say more that
was given the Reagan Bush's campaigns
the Reagan Bush campaigns theft of the
Carter briefing books I believe these
allegations raised the number of serious
question and cinahl mentioned too there
is a question of how this 1980 arms for
hostages deal is affecting the Middle
East peace process it is alleged that
Israel was the middleman in the arms
deal is Israel using its knowledge now
this affair to influence the Bush
administration's negotiations
intelligence newsletter of Paris reports
that when Israeli prime ministers Prime
Minister Shamir was in Washington last
year he presented bush with two files
one of which contained information on
what George knew and when he knew it but
that concern is perhaps a political one
there is a second
and I think broader philosophical
question about what
and that involves what is the job of
Congress tomorrow half a metaphor from
Virginia Woolf does the Dome of the US
Capitol represent the cranium of a
constitutional democracy or merely an
exalted lid that is keeping what is some
pretty nasty stuff from cut spilling
into public view we have about 20
minutes for for questions from the floor
and I'm sure the panelists would be
happy to address any issues here just
we're joined by Senator Wellstone one of
the initiating sponsors senator
Wellstone has an interest in this as an
one of the initiating sponsors he's been
here for a few minutes do you have
anything you wanted to say to our
assemble gathering before you have to
leave I know senator Wellstone
discussion go on I've been just very
interested in what's been said and I I
do I do find myself in very strong
agreement with the sentiment that's been
expressed here which is that there
should indeed be hearings and a real
investigation it's such an important
question don't need to prejudge the
answer but it's such an important
question goes to the very heart of the
kind of questions that should be
researched so on I'm here as a supporter
of this gathering today
[Applause]
would you identify yourselves when you
ask question I wonder if Gary's sick
would be willing to describe the
perspective from inside the the white
house in I guess it was September
October of 1980 when it appeared that
there was going to be a release of the
hostages President Carter delivered an
early morning press statement and then
apparently something happened there
after the date I think here we the
question as I understand it is a an
event that took place in the White House
at a point when President Carter made an
early morning announcement that certain
things were going to happen and then
they didn't happen you said September in
fact I believe the date you're referring
to is April 1st 1980 that was before the
rescue mission and but it was during the
primaries in fact it was the morning of
the Wisconsin primary and this event has
lived on in the mythology and of the of
the time in fact William Casey cited
that the events as he understood them of
April 1st 1980 as one of the reasons why
he was convinced Carter would misuse the
hostage issue to his own benefit and
what happened on that morning is that
President Carter had given the Iranians
a deadline he said that they were
supposed to move the hostages into the
care of the government away from the the
hostage takers away from the students by
the end of March that date ran out and
Carter was prepared on the end on the
day before to make a statement
he was prevailed upon and I was in that
meeting especially by secretary Vance to
please hold off because we had
information that bonny Saudi was going
to make a speech the next day in which
he would in fact announce that the
government was going to take custody of
the hostages
Carter hesitated because he had put
things off many other times and he was
always being accused of Willie you know
wishy-washy behavior and he finally said
all right I'll see you here in the
morning at five o'clock at the Oval
Office and we'll see what he had to say
five o'clock in the morning is what noon
are there abouts in Teheran noon to one
o'clock we all reassembled at five
o'clock in the morning in the Oval
Office on the morning of April 1st the
bani-sadr speech was in fact coming in
in bits and pieces from the FBI s that
was translating the foreign broadcast
information service that was translating
the speech and in that bani-sadr in fact
did say the words that he said that he
was going to say that is that if the
United States fulfilled certain
responsibilities the hostages would in
fact be moved to the custody of the
government Carter then according to the
rules of the game was supposed to reply
in some form to say that okay we've got
a deal Carter put out a statement that
morning which was carefully worded which
said that he saw this as a positive sign
move forward and certainly welcomed the
idea of the hostages being moved into
the care of the government and away from
the others and that the United States
would take positive note of this
something to that effect that was of
course on the morning of the Wisconsin
primary and Carter won the Wisconsin
primary handily and part of as I say
what I consider as somebody who was at
the meeting part of the mythology is
that this whole thing was cooked up by
Carter to use the hostages to win the
Wisconsin primary that this was all done
on that basis that was not my impression
looking to add it looking at it from the
Whitehouse point of view but in many
cases your impression from the inside is
less important than the impression from
the outside and certainly the media I
think a hundred percent felt that this
was manipulation of the hostage issue
for political benefit and that has lived
on
in the time but that's my recollection
of what it looked like from the inside
there's a relationship between that what
transpired subsequent which was they
were not transferred to the government
and in the end the other negotiations
that were going on with a Republican
campaign I I don't think so I my
impression is that that Khomeini in
effect vetoed subsequently the speech
that Bani Sadr had made the Bani Sadr
had made this promise within a few days
Khomeini publicly vetoed that said that
that was not what was going to happen
the hostages were not turned over in
fact to the care of the government and
that led to Carter's decision to launch
the rescue mission and that decision was
taken within a week after that April
first announcement which was then vetoed
turned around and that was when Carter
decided to go with the rescue mission
which took place then on the 24th I
don't think it had anything to do with
the what was going on in the Republican
campaign at that time except as I say it
shaped attitudes for mr. Casey certainly
and he's on record as saying that this
was a deciding moment for him
in seeing how Carter would abuse the
system and manipulate the system for his
own political benefit the continued
rivalry between radicals and pragmatists
in Tehran why in your opinion have we
not heard more from the Iranian side of
this other than mr. v the question is in
view of the competition between rival
factions in Tehran why haven't we heard
more about it from the Iranian side I
can't go into elaborate detail in this
case but I I do believe in fact that the
reason we're hearing about Madrid which
after all was something we didn't know
about eight months ago
none of us really knew about any
meetings in Madrid we had some Inklings
that there had been meetings elsewhere
but it was very fuzzy and very vague and
from my point of view the
the new information about those meetings
which put a beginning on the story in
effect and laid a sort of structure for
the thing that it wasn't a last-second
business that was cobbled together in
October just before the elections but in
fact there was a beginning to this story
and there was a certain logic instructor
- it was one of the things that made me
change my mind about this whole issue
that I finally reluctantly said you know
this is the reason why that information
suddenly became available in my view is
because of rivalry in Tehran where
people who had been told to keep their
mouth shut
previously were suddenly let to be known
that they could talk about this issue to
some degree and I really genuinely
believe that that's why we got the
information on the Madrid meeting so in
that sense they have otherwise there has
been dead silence they have not
published the story in the Iranian
papers I remember this is dynamite in in
Iran also because it indicates that
certain factions who maybe again each
other's throats now but who were united
at that time were colluding with the
United States and Israel at a time of
high ideological fervor and while the
hostages were being held that is
something they have to be very very
careful about talking about publicly in
Iran I think what we've seen is the
Iranians have allowed other people to
speak on their behalf and that that's
what we're getting in terms of these
sources now question here in your famous
op-ed piece you said that you hadn't
made your mind up about whether
President Bush was there I'd wondered if
your mind had changed in either
direction and secondly as to the overall
October Surprise theory what piece of
evidence would do you think no needs to
come out in public which would either
prove or disprove and how would that
happen who benefitted release that let
me be very brief I have not changed my
mind I'm exactly where I was before and
I think jollof us did an excellent job
of laying out it's not so much that I
believed
George Bush was in Paris I mean I would
be prepared to believe in a moment that
he wasn't it doesn't make any sense it
would it be a stupid thing for him to do
it would be extremely risky what keeps
me from coming to that conclusion
is the fact that Bush's story keeps
changing all the time this should be the
easiest thing in the world to prove all
you have to do is pull out the Secret
Service records and say here's where he
was that's it that the people on the
team be interviewed that's the end of
the game that's the end of the story
they have never done that and I simply
can't understand why if they really want
to lay this to rest they haven't done it
where are the documents where are the
facts this is nothing secret secondly
what is there that needs to be known
well yeah I've been working on this as
other people have them certainly Martin
has for the last two years or more
putting together little bits and pieces
of information I do not operate on the
basis that there is going to be a sudden
revelation from heaven the skies will
open and everything will become clear
that is not the way the story works it's
put together in little bits and pieces
like a large mosaic and we've got quite
a little bit of the landscape
identifiable in that mosaic right now
but there are large gaping holes I don't
think they're going to be filled in by
one single piece of information yes yeah
the lady here yes the author of October
Surprise I would like to know Gary what
specific dates if we have them these
Madrid meetings happened on because as
you know this is really the one
significant new piece of information
that was not already published in my
book in 1989 the dates for the meetings
in Madrid unfortunately there's some
other people doing research on this and
I can't steal their material at this
point let me be somewhat more general
than I would like to be but it really is
somebody else's information and I simply
have to respect that at this point I
would say from the 25th to the 29th of
July and from the
let's say the 10th to the 15th of August
and that in those time periods there
were in each case probably two different
meetings so they would have a meeting
one day adjourn and have a meeting the
next day and then they would go home and
then come back later and have another
set of a dual set of meetings that's my
understanding at the moment if I any
individuals as you have already besides
mr. Cooby and mr. Kasich
there are allegations I have my basic
rule of thumb on identifying individuals
who are involved is that I want to have
at least two and I would prefer to have
three different sources before I make
any public statements and I don't have
that as yet without giving the names how
many individuals in addition to mr.
casey from the republican camp or
republican sympathizers and also on the
Iranian side in addition to mr. Cooby
numbers in the meetings themselves for
which I have an eyewitness
mr. Casey was accompanied by two
individuals is that somebody from the
Congress Congress side who's
investigating what some media its media
accompanied by anyone yes mr. Carew he
was accompanied by his brother Hasan who
shows up in the iran-contra affair later
on and he was also accompanied by a
couple of Revolutionary Guards question
me here harvey wasserman from the
Columbus Ohio Free Press it's a lot of
the speculation has centered on whether
or not George Bush actually went to
Paris and I think it's been demonstrably
or well stated that that may ultimately
be a red herring it seems inconceivable
that such negotiations could have gone
on between the Reagan Bush campaign and
the Iranians without George Bush knowing
about it whether or not he went to Paris
but I have a question and a quick
follow-up isn't it possible that the
Iranians who many people believe they
that they believe the real power in us
did lie with the CIA and therefore would
have rested with with George Bush he was
at Ford's former head isn't it possible
that in order to seal this
arrangement they would have demanded
George Bush's personal presence if not
in Paris then perhaps meeting with mr.
Raja in New York or some other personal
contact with George Bush at some point
along into negotiations and I have a
quick follow-up I mean I I think one
might as well take that as your
statement I mean yeah I that see that
there's there is reason there's reason
to that I'd only add to it that some it
ought to be borne in mind that American
democracy wasn't the only loser in this
affair that by dealing directly with the
hostage takers and with the people
around too many in effect great blow was
dealt at their one chance of
representative government in Iran as
well because the Bani Sadr government
was badly undercut by this process of
negotiation so it it adds to the rather
large mountain of debt that we are the
Iranian people for past and present
interventions in their internal affairs
people say they were at least meanings
that Bush's presence was required
because you know he would sort of learn
way to the negotiations and they wanted
a commitment from somebody who would be
in power the follow-up is of course the
carter administration did make a failed
attempt to rescue the hostages and then
discuss a second one this is free mr.
SiC my understanding is that both Oliver
North and Richard Secord were involved
or in one or both of those operations
could you discuss that place to the best
of my knowledge Richard Secord was not
involved in the first he was the deputy
commander of the second and was the man
who was primarily responsible for
putting it together Oliver North I if he
was involved at all he was a very young
officer at the time I have been told by
people and I simply cannot verify this
I've not personally verified the
information that he was in a unit that
in fact was deployed to Turkey
during the first rescue mission in case
it was needed I've been told that I have
absolutely no hard evidence of it and I
make no claims of it if so he was very
much on the fringes of the operation as
far as I know neither Secord nor North
were involved in the direct planning or
execution of the first rescue mission
there's another question herbicide
you're just one month I'd like to state
more briefly the question that we ended
the original press conference on that
there is this this ominous undertone to
this about there being sort of two
governments here in the United States
there are two alternative explanations
of that one is that all you had was the
Reagan Bush campaign group that was
getting ready to be the government
anyhow but there's this other group of
covert operation experts that were
inside the Central Intelligence Agency
that had been removed from government
that President Carter has referred to in
his Village Voice interview what do you
understand mr. sik and any of the other
panelists to be the relationship if any
between that group of disgruntled CIA
covert operation specialists and this
entire operation that took on the the
tone of a covert operation well let me
say this from my understanding and again
I'm speaking only on the basis of
fragmentary evidence that when mr. Casey
became the director of CIA that in many
cases he felt that to run a proper
intelligence organization you shouldn't
just use the people inside the
organization who can be identified under
light cover in embassies and the things
of the sort but that you should have
them under deep cover they other words
they should be not directly affiliated
with the agency and some of those people
if I understand it correctly did in fact
end up in rather interesting jobs places
later on where presumably they could act
outside the the realm again of not only
of possible penetration by the enemy but
also penetration by Congress
that these people were not actually
working for you you don't have to
account for them and that they out they
don't have to be subject to
congressional oversight now I've heard
convincing evidence that that happened
in certain cases I can't you know name a
list of 20 people we do know that some
of those people showed up again in the
the enterprise in the iran-contra affair
and they did so I have to me it's not
difficult at all to believe that some of
those people who removed from the CIA
ended up coming back working for the
campaign perhaps working off the books
for mr. Casey and showing up again in
covert operations here and there that
was their profession they were good at
it and they probably wanted to get back
in the game again so that doesn't
surprise me I'm I do as I say and as I
said before I do part company with you
in the sense that these people
constitute a second government that is
somehow making policy for the United
States I just like to make a comment on
your comment about Richard Secord if I
may and that is that I have with me
published sources that I will give you
after the meeting the mr. seacord was in
fact involved with the logistical
arrangements for the body
KYNA egypt site and in the desert one
operation question here did anybody of
you during the long investigations come
across any piece of information that
might be in one way or the other
important to the
did anybody of you during the long
investigations come across any piece of
information that might be in one way or
the other important to the assessment of
Robert Gates talked to a former Israeli
intelligence official named Barry Ben
minashi and he has talked about gates in
connection with 1980 and being involved
in this deal and that's the only source
I have on the record whose doctor that's
the only source I have on the record for
this and I think it's sort of published
speculation at this point but I think
it's something that could be
investigated and it's also I mean it is
apparent I think that there was somebody
in the cart of white house who was
passing information on to the Republican
Party and it would seem that Gates would
be one person that could be looked into
yeah my name is Herbert quindi with the
executive Intelligence Review the
publication associated with Lyndon
LaRouche the basically what I said about
the tapes is what I know about the tapes
that is that that I do know that serous
hashing Me's office was bugged starting
as early as October 1980 that he did
business out of there with his brother
and with certainly with the US
government and also presumably with
other people during that period of time
that he was subsequently indicted by
Rudolph Giuliani in 1984 for illegal
arms sales based on evidence dating back
to 1980 and 81 and those tapes and the
tapes to the best of my knowledge have
never been seen since that time so I
that's that's basically what I know
yeah at one point said that the tapes
had been lost because at one point we
were trying to get access to him
when the court record from the case the
Hashimi case and that sting operation in
86 Gary you mentioned that the arms were
practically leaving as the hostages were
coming back do we have any hard evidence
that any arms are going in before the
Turkish plane was downed in in July of
of 81 only the word of people I have no
manifests I do have some contract data
which looks real involving an Iranian
that I know independently to have been a
real name of an individual involved in
procurement that was signed with an
Israeli arms dealer in July of 1981
there however is a lot of testimony from
individuals about and many of these
senior Israelis who will not go on the
record unfortunately with this that the
arms shipment started much earlier than
that there is in fact an allegation
which will remain to be seen that in
fact there were some arms shipments in
addition to the the one airplane
shipment that we know of in October of
1980 from Israel which looked very much
like a sort of gesture of goodwill that
this is sort of sealing the deal that
was done in a in October 20th 3:15 to
the 20th that in addition to that there
may have been other deliveries even
earlier I mean before the inauguration
as a further evidence of that but that
again remains very speculative it's on
the basis of a single source and I feel
very uncomfortable talking about it
because my rule of thumb has been
throughout this that since these people
that are talking to us are in many cases
themselves dubious unreliable people
that you simply don't go with a single
source I like to have two or three
before I'm prepared to make an
allegation in this case I only have one
source you say that's between the
election and the inauguration run your
time for one more question here
David McMichael with reference to mr.
Fenn minashi Jule if I recall my
conversation with him correctly he said
that up through at least September of
1980 at the various meetings that had
been the working assumption both of the
Israelis and the Iranian representatives
that the objective was somehow to
deliver the hostages into the custody of
the Republican campaign representatives
and that in fact arrangements had been
made to deliver them in Karachi by
sometime very early in October and that
they were very surprised to learn that
the decision had been made by the mr.
Casey that they were in no case to be
delivered but that also raises the
further question of except perhaps for
pettiness of why the delay after the
election when no further electoral
purpose could be served by holding the
hostages anyone prepared to comment on
that yeah complicated story altogether
it's true not just mr. Benn minashi also
others have said that the Republicans
first goal was to get these hostages out
using Karachi as a point of departure
now I think one of the problems the
people who investigate this story have
had to deal with in the last two years
is that it is a terribly complicated
thing it's not like a very straight line
I think there were setbacks I think
there were changes of mind I think there
were a reverses and I even wouldn't rule
out that you had competing factions with
him the election campaign with indeed
the Reagan Bush campaign team ah and and
I think what mr. Burman Menasha said
about the Karachi connection would make
a lot of sense except for one point how
would they have explained to the
American public in July 1980 that almost
sudden they got the hostages out while
the President Jimmy Carter did not get
him out
they were very grave political questions
associated with this and
he's right if mr. Benn minashi is right
about the Karachi thing it would be very
interesting to know why it never came to
pass
I want to thank our panelists for coming
here today and laying out the facts as
they know them and what is not known
we'll proceed now to the next panel long
we're gonna have a quick change of scene
if we may
Morton Halperin Marcus Raskin please
come forward the second panel will look
at the issues that have been raised from
separate perspectives Mort Halperin
we'll begin with a constitutional view
professor Beisner from American
University will present the view of an
historian mark Raskin will look at it
from the point of view of a longtime
policy practitioner and student of
American policy and ethics morality and
Tom Blanton will look at the issue from
the point of view of the record as a
active member of the National Security
Archive he's in a position to give an
evaluation of the data that's available
and to address the question of what
Congress if it involved itself would be
likely to find
so if Mort Halperin would begin
thank you I'm pleased to be here I also
need to say that I so I've explained to
the organizers of the conference I had a
prior commitment which could not be
changed so I will have to speak and then
leave and I mean no disrespect to my
fellow panelists whose views I would
certainly like to stay in here and join
in the conversation about so I regret
that I think it is worth noting that
this conference is being held on the
twentieth anniversary of the beginning
of the publication of the Pentagon
Papers by the New York Times an event
which began to educate the American
public to a fact which also underlines
this meeting and that fact is that we
have permitted in this country something
that should not be permitted in a
Democratic Society and which our
Constitution was designed to prevent
namely we have permitted a secret
government a government that both
functions in secret and then is allowed
to keep its history secret the startling
thing about the Pentagon Papers is that
it revealed that what we had been told
about the war was not what had happened
to remind you just of one of the most
and for me the perhaps the most
startling revelation namely that the
South Vietnamese government in 1965 did
not ask the American government to
intervene militarily in fact it was
bitterly opposed to the American
military intervention but we had told
the South Vietnamese government that
unless they allowed American troops to
come into Vietnam we would cease all our
support and that in fact not only did
they have to allow the troops to come in
but they had to pretend to ask for them
and so the American public was told that
there was this urgent request from the
South Vietnamese government which we
were responding to to help a free people
as we always call our lives as we now
call the Kuwaitis to help a free people
and that we had to do it
we learned from the Pentagon Papers that
this was simply a lie that they did not
want us in that we had insisted upon
coming in and there were many other
fundamental falsehoods that were we
learned about only from the Pentagon
Papers I think we need to insist
certainly now that the Cold War has
ended and that the primary justification
for the secret agencies for the secret
government and for the secret history
the primary justification for that the
Cold War has come to an end abroad that
we need to start insisting that the
legacy of the Cold War at home be lifted
and that the United States be restored
to the democracy that our founders meant
it to be that we celebrate the 200th
anniversary of the Bill of Rights we
celebrate the 20th anniversary of the
publication of the Pentagon Papers that
we celebrate the end of the Cold War
abroad by restoring democracy at home
and that means ending secret agencies it
means that the Congress must insist that
the intelligence agencies of the
government the NRO the National
Reconnaissance Office whose very
existence is still supposed to be secret
the CIA functions the national security
agencies functions that these be made
public and that their budgets be made
public but they're also that the history
become public that we not be dependent
on a Daniel Ellsberg to give us the
Pentagon Papers that we not be dependent
on a Gary SiC to dig and dig until he
begins to come up with evidence of a
possible October Surprise but that the
government be required to make the
history of what has happened to us
public in a much more timely fashion
than is now going on now as we sit here
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
is locking up a very very modest
proposal it is a proposal that for the
first time statutorily sets out the
standards for the publication of the
diplomatic history of the United States
we
released 30 years after the event and as
we know the entire Advisory Committee to
the State Department resigned because
the State Department was putting out a
volume of what took place 30 years ago
which left out all the key documents and
which gave no indication that it had
left out all the key documents and
therefore they resigned in protest
Congress is now seeking to change this
the Senate last year unanimously voted a
set of rules they are now before the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee and
we have a letter from the State
Department announcing that any
procedures that Congress will impose
upon the release of these documents is
unconstitutional and violates the
president's prerogatives in foreign
affairs and the president is as he now
seems to do with any bill that shows any
life in the Congress of the United
States is threatening a veto of this
legislation on the grounds that the
president's legal adviser has told him
that this will jeopardize the
constitutional prerogatives of the
President now you all remember the
famous story of the crowds in
Philadelphia who were gathering outside
the coal where the Constitution was
being written in secret and the great
fear was that they were in fact creating
a monarchy and the crowds in
Philadelphia were fearful as the
Constitutional Convention went on and
secret longer and longer that what they
were going to be confronted with was the
creation of a new monarchy and as the
Constitutional Convention finally ended
the great hero of the convention as far
as the people were concerned Benjamin
Franklin came out and the people
gathered around him and they shouted
what is it what is it meaning was it a
monarchy and Franklin looked at them and
said it's a republic if you can keep it
and I think that message needs to be
directed to two places first of all we
need to try to find a way to persuade
George Bush if not Boyden gray that it
is a republic and that we intend to keep
it they seem to think that in fact it is
a monarchy in which the President and
not the Congress decides
what information we will have about how
our government is function and second of
all we need to direct that message to
the Congress because the Congress has
been unwilling to take on the President
on the issues of government secrecy and
let me just suggest a few simple steps
that I think the Congress ought to take
so that we do not need to meet five
years from now and ten years from now
and 20 years from now to wonder again
what has been done in the name of the
United States in secrecy by our secret
government Congress ought to enact this
very simple and very modest proposal
about the diplomatic history of the
United States it ought to make the
budget of the intelligence community and
the functions of those agencies public
and what to legislate the rules and
procedures on which they operate they
know what to amend the Freedom of
Information Act so that it can become an
even more effective tool than it is for
the release of information relating to
national security and Congress needs to
make it clear in its oversight functions
that it will not permit a secret
government to operate in the name of the
United States without on knowing about
it this is a republic it is a
constitutional democracy it was built on
a series of checks and balances and it
was built on the fundamental principle
that the people have a right to know
what their government is doing to judge
what the elected officials are doing at
the ballot box and in communications
with the president and the executive
branch and we need to say that as the
cold war ends abroad we will free
ourselves to restore democracy at home
in which we have a right to know what is
done and a right to judge the officials
of the government by knowing fully what
they did in our name and those are the
principles which I suggest should inform
us as we look at the facts of this
particular case thank
[Applause]
I'd like to turn to
Marcus Raskin distinguished fellow of
the Institute for Policy Studies thank
you very much I have several points
which really are a follow-on to what
Mort Halperin has said and that really
goes to I think the case finally but
then using the case as a way of
rethinking or restructuring our own
federal government one way of reading
American history is to take the
Constitution and say well the bill of
rights to the Constitution and the
preamble are the Democratic sections and
that the constitutional body that is the
internal workings of the Constitution
really represent the how a government is
to operate and if a constitutional
struggle which has existed in the United
States since its inception was between a
republic and a democracy in the 18th
century a democracy was not quite that
popular indeed it was viewed as
something very dangerous by a number of
people within the United States and in
different parts of the world and the
Republic on the other hand reflected the
idea that the well-born and the
propertied and the whites males should
in fact govern and that the whole
struggle then of the American
Constitution and the whole struggle in
relation to that Constitution and to the
character of the Society was going to be
whether or not we could indeed be a
democracy and so every step of the way
the Bill of Rights was used as an
instrument and the preamble was you
as an instrument to develop inclusivity
to change the nature of what the
governing structure was going to be to
include people rather than exclude them
to include women to include minorities
etc and that all of those reflected the
historic struggle within the United
States for at least a hundred seventy
five year period
now simultaneous to this by the end of
the Second World War something else
began to happen and that was that the
United States found itself having an
empire and trying to figure out how to
run that Empire and so it began the
process of reorganizing government
itself reorganizing of that government
came indeed to become what I termed the
national security state the national
security state meant that there would be
neither war nor peace that there would
be loyalty in fact not to the people as
a whole but to organization to the
organizational structure that there
would be secrecy in which secrecy would
dominate the character of what the basic
system of government would be and that
those who became witting to that system
would in fact be the ones who would run
the action so in effect what we had over
the course of a period of time from
nineteen forty-seven forty-eight on was
the slow erosion of the democratic
process in the following way not the
democracy seized or not that the
Republic seized but each became more and
more a fig leaf for the actual ways that
the government operated that the way the
government operated was basically
through and with the national security
apparatus and that apparatus included
the Central Intelligence Agency it
included
national security agency the CIA
significant aspects of the Department of
Defense and that each of those in fact
had no legitimacy from Congress that is
to say there were no public hearings in
many cases that the budgets for example
of the CIA the National Security Agency
were voted in secret without any sort of
understanding of the bulk of Congress
knowing where and who was voting where
those monies were to go and how they
would be in fact used so this was the
framework going into the 1980 election
the election was that this country was
involved in neither war nor peace that
we were involved in constant conflict
that the government itself that is the
national security state itself was
involved in numerous covert operations
over a 40 year period that coming in
therefore to the election it was assumed
that this is indeed the way business was
to be done that the United States itself
found that it would operate to suborn
elections in different places in the
world if it didn't like the way the
character of that election was going so
finally what began happening is that
this method was turned onto ourselves
and in 1980 what we began seeing was as
that national security state system
began to come apart a little bit as a
result of the end of the Vietnam War as
a result of Watergate as a result of the
Carter election it meant that new
notions of the possibility of governing
in a new way came to the fore but also
it meant that those people who were
disturbed about the transformation of
the National secured
and greater control over covert
operations were indeed very very
concerned and very upset about that
direction
Casey played an important role in this
regard as I would argue did several
members or two members of the National
Security Council staff and indeed what
we're talking about here is really in
terms of several of the people who have
spoken several of the people here have
been members of the National Security
Council staff so at least to that extent
we know whereof we speak the direction
then which occurred in 1984 that
election meant the two things one is the
reassertion of the national security
state pushing forward greater defense
budgets and also having as having a new
system which before was only used
sparingly in my view it was used but
only sparingly and that was contract
officers who were assets of the of the
CIA who in effect would receive
contracts to be in business
on by themselves for the purpose of
carrying out activities of the American
government in the 1980 election it was
critical to win that election on the
part both of the Republicans Democrats
obviously Reagan was behind it was said
by two percent in the voting or in the
polls of that time and so that election
became critical and what here was
important was to find that way of
winning the election and so here what
was used was those groupings within the
national security state establishment
who had served at one time as people who
could make all sorts of contacts in
order to
of upset the the usual the direction of
that election possibly this had been
done earlier in 1968 as well where the
Republicans attempted to undercut of
President Johnson and indeed also that
election by making contact with South
Vietnamese representatives in order to
get the South Vietnamese to stop the
possibility of the United States not
bombing during that period so here we
are we know pretty much what the facts
are can this be made public in such a
way as to change the direction of the
country and to begin the process of
dismantling the national security state
this case can begin to do it for it goes
to a fundamental element of democracy
which is election the election by the
people and if it is shown that this
election was indeed polluted that indeed
it will open the possibilities of a
glass most within the United States it
will open up the possibility of saying
what indeed does the CIA do where are
its records what does the National
Security Agency do are its records to be
made and should they be made public and
so forth and so on in that process we
will then be able to begin to talk
through what the character of a modern
democracy should be and the character in
my view of that modern democracy has to
be predicated on openness and unfairness
and non pollution of elections either
our own or of other nations as well so
that means that the rules of the game
which we want to apply to ourselves we
will have to
in application to other nations as well
thank you very much I would like to turn
to Professor Beisner historian from
American University I'd like to speak
briefly about thank you some things that
seem to me in this in this story that
are both commonplace on the one hand and
rare on the other and then briefly
suggest the significance of some of the
events historically the what I see is
commonplace in this story or that were a
part of the story that is commonplace is
the close connection between foreign
policy and politics there's absolutely
nothing new in that in our history at
all and in and it's become increasingly
commonplace since about the 1940s since
the World War 2 era I think and I think
largely for two reasons one of which is
very encouraging the first reason is
simply the growing importance of
international affairs as in in the
United States that is the growing
participation of the United States in
world affairs and so the issues come up
much more whereas you could have
campaigns in the nearly a century ago or
more than a century ago in which it
simply would not be an issue the
encouraging part is it seems to me that
compared to a century ago for 75 years
ago and to some degree on some issues
even yet today century or so ago the
public at large had very little interest
in foreign affairs very little knowledge
about foreign affairs and the US
government was able to make policy most
of the time in
a kind of public opinion and political
vacuum another qualifications to that
certain times of course but from the
1940s onward presidents their
administration's members of Congress and
so forth have become increasingly aware
that there is a public out there that
they need that cares about diplomatic
and military issues and that they need
to be concerned with and as that concern
has grown the temptation to play
politically with diplomatic events as
grown I think but the normal situation
what again has been fairly commonplace
in elections it seems to me has been
cases of the incumbent manipulating
events to his advantage so that we have
it could get arguments about all of
these but let me just briefly mention
some we have Truman in 1948 for example
in the quick recognition of Israel and
on another kind of issue pre-empting the
right with a very hard line against the
Soviet Union helping get elected in
nineteen forty eight we have Johnson in
1964 withholding far more belligerent
plans in Vietnam so that he could
picture Goldwater as the crazy man we
have the Johnson excuse me we have the
the Johnson administration then at the
very end of the 1968 campaign trying to
produce negotiations on the Vietnam War
in order to help get Humphrey elected we
have Nixon in 72 along with Kissinger
also playing all kinds of games with
respect to Vietnam negotiations in order
to affect the 72 elections so this this
is very commonplace and I have not heard
anything today indicating that
Carter would have passed up such an
opportunity in 1980 either and
apparently that the there were some
potential October surprises in the
decisions to allow arms already
purchased by Iran to be delivered to
Iran as as mark has indicated another
another common or fairly common
phenomenon in the last 50 years has been
the u.s. action affecting the elections
of other states and a reverse example of
that which I might want to mention since
I've been brought here as a historian I
think it's my duty to mention something
at least 200 years old or nearly 200
years old an extreme rarity in American
history was the effort by the government
of France in 1796 to elect a president
making every attempt it could to get
Jefferson elected in the expectation an
accurate one that a Jefferson
administration would be far friendlier
to a revolutionary France than an Adams
administration would be when they failed
in that attempt but not for lack of
trying
what we have heard described today and
what we've all read about the last few
years that may have happened in 1980 if
it did happen is a rarity and in this
case I cannot play the normal historians
role of declaring everything commonplace
something we've always seen the kind of
if this indeed occurred if this indeed
occurred and we have an opposition party
affecting foreign policy and an
extremely important area in order to
affect the election if this occurred the
way it did the only precedent that I can
think of at the moment
that is similar to that has also just
been mentioned by mark and that was the
the effort of the Republican Party in
1968 to torpedo any last-minute vietnam
settlement by contacting the vietnamese
south vietnamese government and
encouraging that government successfully
to hold back from the Paris negotiations
that were just opening at that time I
don't for a moment believe that that
action prevented a peace settlement in
Vietnam in 1968 I think that was
unlikely to happen any thought any time
soon but it was a it was a crucial
intrusion into diplomacy by private
parties and in secret the meaning the
significance of all of this it seems to
me is it is it is probably too early to
tell somewhat narrowly again I'm
skeptical despite some of the figures
that have been mentioned that the Reagan
campaign intrusion into the Iran
situation in 1980 decided an election I
doubt it would take some extraordinary
analysis to even make the case that that
that made a difference in Reagan's
election it's quite clear that the
Republican campaign group however
thought that it would there are some
other interesting fairly narrow if
significant historical issues however
that become more understandable now as
we hear the story of 1981 is the story
of the behavior of the Reagan National
Security Council which seems to be
continuous with the behavior of the
Republican campaign organization in 1980
as others have mentioned and I won't
belabor the point here the the whole
iran-contra issue looks different now
and there in in the given this the
perspective that this situation gives us
there are some broader issues as well
I've recently been doing some reading in
the history of US relations with with
Iran in the Truman administration and it
have just in fact the last few days been
reading in that volume of the Foreign
Relations of the United States series
that has been so excised it's a
fascinating volume it covers the u.s.
relations with Iran and other states in
the Near East from 1952 to 1954 there
are some crucial documents in it but
absolutely no reference whatsoever to
the fact that the CIA played a fairly
important role in Iran in 1953 but the
but but I bring it up here also as a way
of indicating how I think what we've
heard today suggest that this country
has never understood with whom it's
dealing in Iran I think the Carter
Administration efforts demonstrate that
the regular campaign people probably
demonstrated that and as far as I can
see Harry Truman and Dean Acheson did
not understand Iran either although they
Aitchison seems to have understood Iran
better than then the British did but
ashes ins concern in the 1952 53 54
volume has very little to do with Iran
it has very little to do with Islam it
all has to do with the Soviet Union it's
that we have to act in such a way in
Iran in order to prevent it falling into
the hands of quote the commies end quote
which is actually State Department
telegram ease and and and not quite as
pejorative as it sounds but the language
you use
I think we also have further evidence
today which is pretty obvious that
president's concerned about reelection
will always worry about what's going to
how a diplomatic or military situation
might affect their reelection whether
it's in a campaign year or one or two or
three years away from the campaign year
I simply regard that as a given and I'm
not sure that there's that there's
absolutely anything that can be done
about it somewhat facetiously but not
entirely I'd like to say also that
listening reading reading much of what's
come out over the last year or so
reading the packet that that that you've
received today that even I got a copy up
yesterday and listening to the
investigative journalists who spoke
earlier seems to me that in part today
we've been treated to sort of a a legacy
- Izzy stone I mean I I felt a number of
times that is Eastham should be here but
there are people carrying on the role
obviously finally I'd like to say one
one other thing one of the things that
I've been convinced of over the years of
studying diplomatic history and not
without ambivalence I stand before you
as a a an ardent middle 'roger and so
ambivalence comes naturally to me and
one of the things that I that I've
become convinced of over the years is
that in a constitutional democracy
foreign policy is bound to be carried
out in such a way that's messy and
that's the word that's often used when
when when this issue was commented on
and what I have felt ambivalent about
over the years very often is well is
that really what we want and those of
you who have read and listened to George
Kennan for example over the years know
how deeply in the souls of people like
Kenan why the wish to get rid of the
public and to get rid of some of the
difficulties involved in the messiness
involved in practicing foreign policy in
a republic but the last 10 years and
this issue along with the iran-contra
especially have convinced me that we
could hardly have messier attempts at
conducting foreign policy then we have
received when people make an effort to
conduct that policy outside the channels
of constitutional democracy so the issue
is probably not a nice neat clear-cut
foreign policy conducted
undemocratically versus a messy
democratic foreign policy I'm not quite
sure that the conclusion is that foreign
policy is always messy but it's clear
that an attempt to get around the bounds
set by the American Constitution and law
is likely to make the situation even
worse
thank you
[Music]
Thank You professor Beisner the last
panelist is Tom Blanton who is deputy
director of the National Security
Archive
I was asked on to this panel today to
discuss essentially whether and how a
congressional investigation should take
place as to these issues around the the
hostages in 1980 in the election
campaign but mine is a very small voice
actually when compared to the sting wish
panelists that we've heard from today
and as compared to representative Derek
and his 75 colleagues who signed a
letter requesting such an investigation
and I think especially compared to the
voices of the former hostages who's
requested such an investigation and so
I'd like to limit my remarks really to
three basic points one of which is the
historical context for the calls for a
congressional investigation second is
some specific ideas as to where Congress
might go and what it might find and
third is to comment generally on what
may or may not be achieved by a
congressional investigation first just
on the historical context as I've gone
over the past couple weeks through the
literally hundreds of press clippings
through the mailings that the Barbara
Honaker has kindly sent me over the
years through the various books by
bani-sadr but Gary six books the books
by the negotiators and the Americans who
ultimately did get the hostages out I
was struck that I came across a call for
a congressional investigation which to
my knowledge is the very first call for
a congressional investigation of the
release of the hostages and it was
actually made by a prominent American
while the hostages were still being held
and I'd like to read it to you today
because I think in many respects it
could become the epigraph for our
ongoing efforts to see an investigation
occur and let me quote I think it is
time for us to have a complete
investigation as to the diplomatic
efforts that were made in the beginning
why they have been there
so long and when they come home what do
we have to do in order to bring that
about what arrangements were made and I
would suggest that Congress should hold
such an investigation quote/unquote that
was Ronald Reagan on October 28 from the
presidential debate with Jimmy Carter I
think he was right I agree with this
distinguished American there should be
an investigation let me just suggest a
few points about what Congress could
look for and might find and in this
regard I must admit I've been scooped
somewhat and I recommend to everyone
that they visit their local newsstand to
get a copy of this week's issue of the
Nation magazine David corn has written a
an excellent article summarizing much of
these leads and issues under the title
leads Congress should pursue and I
recommend it to everyone
considering investigating or continuing
an investigation but let me just go down
a few of the the key records that
different speakers have already alluded
to that that may help resolve this issue
one way or another first of course the
campaign records from the Reagan Bush
campaign of the fall of 1980 which are
apparently in the custody of the Reagan
Library Project in California and Edwin
Meese the former Attorney General has
the say over whether anyone can gain
access to those
I think obviously from what Gary six
said on the first panel it's going to
require something on the order of a
subpoena to get into those but in those
papers should be things like appointment
books and phone logs and a variety of
records that may or may not show were
there actual meetings were people in the
office were people were Republican
members of that campaign talking to
Iranians and so forth and that's
certainly an imperative and I think it's
clear from the efforts of journalists
and so forth that the fact they haven't
been able to get access to those
materials is in itself a recommendation
for congressional investigation
second of course would be the William
Casey's personal papers as far as I know
only one researcher has been allowed
access to Casey's personal papers dating
from the 1980 period that was Joseph
Persico for his biography of Casey I
recommend it to you not for
what it says about the October Surprise
because it doesn't say very much it
discusses it very briefly and I think
less than a page but for the context of
Casey's life and Casey's operations and
very essential to any informed judgment
on this matter
apparently Persico went through the
personal papers about twenty to thirty
boxes worth at Casey's house here in
Washington with the permission of
Casey's Widow while writing his
biography of Casey he found no
appointment books and no phone logs and
he could not conclude from the evidence
available to him whether or not those
still existed or whether those had
already been shipped off to the Hoover
Institution which is as I understand it
the ultimate repository of the Casey
materials again I suspect because these
are under the control of the family
it will require a subpoena to gain any
further access to those materials
further we now have the new evidence of
the last several months is really the in
the form of a series of interviews many
of them on videotape many of them on
audiotape many of them in notes by some
very credible researchers the crew put
together the PBS Frontline peace robert
Parry and others here he's sick and
others again those are very useful as
tips for investigators but to have them
become a real core public record of this
story they need to be under oath and
they need to be taken in some official
proceeding again an argument for an
official congressional investigation
further Gary sick this morning
recommended a couple of other record
sets if you will that should be gone
after things like the flight records
because they do have tail numbers from a
variety of these witnesses that they
have interviewed passport records
customs and immigration and so forth and
the tapes from the sting operation that
Cyrus assuming was part of the
celebrated Evans bar am case that
ultimately was dropped in New York that
by the way did pick up for bono far in
its wide net at the time in 86 again
much of this material may need to be
subpoenaed because there's almost no
other way to avoid the privacy
considerations and so forth
that might prevent it from being
obtained I think the most sensitive area
of all of records that haven't been
discussed yet today which may be the
most illuminating or the least
illuminating de pinyin depending on what
you come up with are the communications
intelligence the regular intercepts
monitoring of worldwide electronic
communications by the National Security
Agency clearly in 1980 that monitoring
had to have been a major focus of the
entire US intelligence community this
was the primary issue of the day clearly
they would have been monitoring as best
they could any communications to or from
the Iranian Foreign Ministry in Tehran
clearly they would be attempting to
monitor any communications to or from
various embassies particularly in places
like Paris where there was a significant
iranian exile community and where
Khomeini himself had spent some time
while in exile clearly they would have
been attempting to monitor the Iranians
with whom they were negotiating for
instance Tabata by the is it the brother
of the wife of Khomeini son who was
ultimately that one of the key mediators
with the Algerians in the ultimo the
ultimate Carter negotiations clearly
they would have been attempting to track
people like Ross and Johnny people like
Mehdi Karroubi who was after all a
member of the Parliament and apparently
the leader of a hard-line faction which
they were clearly worried about which
preached time after time against any
negotiations with the Great Satan and
they would clearly I believe have been
attempting to monitor at least any
dealings of the various arms dealers
expatriates and others who were
attempting to make contacts between the
US government and the Iranians various
reporters have said to me over the time
that they know of as many as a hundred
of a hundred such contacts by would-be
dealers
most of which never came to anything but
they did exist and the records of those
contacts the electronic intercepts of
phone calls of cables of radio
transmissions and so forth would have
clearly been a major focus of US
investment in in monitoring and clearly
I think this is the
the the major area which recommends a
congressional investigation because
there is effectively no way for
journalists for historical researchers
and even in many respects for attorneys
in court cases because the court cases
would be forced to be dropped the
government has a power under the
classified information Procedures Act to
force the dropping of various
prosecution's on the basis of state
secrets clearly a congressional
investigation is in effect the only
practical method for getting at those
super secret above top secret
communications intercepts which are so
sensitive that I think in the 1980s only
on a couple of key occasions
particularly the downing of the KL
double-oh-seven has the US government
officially released any of these
intercepts clearly it can be done when
it serves certain certain purposes of
the administration but in this case it
would require it not only a subpoena but
congressional investigators with
codeword clearances and so forth but
obviously a major should be a major area
to focus and then I'll refer you to
David Korins article for other general
discussion of these records systems and
let me move on to 0.3 which is what are
we likely to find out what what may or
may not be achieved what we may find out
from if we actually get a hold of these
records is whether or not the meetings
actually took place the communications
intercepts may show whether there was a
deal or not in the sense that you would
presumably have conversations dialogues
back-and-forth reporting's and so forth
that may convey some of the substance of
those discussions but from the personal
records the appointment books the phone
logs the credit card records and so
forth and so on
you can only really conclude whether the
meetings actually took place that may be
enough that in itself would probably be
a scandal and I would just remind people
of that that while you're chasing George
Bush and other folks that just the mere
fact of top campaign officials meeting
with representatives of foreign
government and discussing something as
sensitive as the hostages isn't itself
highly questionable activity and Gary
SiC and others have proved this to their
satisfaction so just in closing it's
unclear how far even a congressional
investigation with subpoenas could go
toward resolving the issue of whether
there was a deal or not they may only be
able to resolve whether there were
meetings or not but there has to be a
major attempt to create a public record
because without that public record we're
all going to continue to be dependent on
the kinds of anonymous sources unsourced
information hearsay information that is
very troubling to any investigators
certainly a total documents fiend like
myself in the National Security Archive
staff who've been very strongly agnostic
on this whole question simply because of
the almost complete lack of of that kind
of hard documentation and its dependence
on interviews and sources we're not
reporters if we were reporters those
sources as Gary SiC and Robert Perry and
others are demonstrated are plenty good
enough to go with getting in the
newspaper but the point now I think is
that Congress internally at least is
debating whether to hold right now there
in the course of an informal staff
proceeding what congressman Derrick
referred to as the equivalent of a grand
jury
type investigation prior to bringing an
indictment to see whether or not the
evidence warrants the ringing of an
indictment the mounting of an official
investigation that's all well and good
and I was especially encouraged that
congressman Derrick said that they would
come to a decision on whether to proceed
he estimated within the next two weeks I
would be greatly surprised as that
occurred but the point I think
fundamentally is that if proceedings are
kept informal if proceedings are held in
secret say in the various intelligence
committees of the House and the Senate
then you're guaranteed to have no
resolution of this story one way or
another a caution even if you do have a
formal investigation with subpoena power
you're not guaranteed to know whether or
not it actually occurred but if you
don't have an investigation you're
guaranteed never know so in conclusion I
just want to echo what Morehead Kennedy
said earlier which is just simply
as a citizen for the health of the
democracy for the public's right to know
there should be a formal official
investigation with subpoena power to
pull all of this evidence together for
all of our sake thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
we have time for questions comments yes
please would the new service I'd like to
know why are you so naive is to think
we'd get anywhere with Congress if they
did have an investigation when they
don't answer subpoenas like Gonzalez is
trying to get the Federal Reserve Board
to come forward with the records on
banks and can't get it pair of time
after time and when they also stop the
iran-contra hearings and told them not
to go back beyond a certain period the
card in the FBI because they if they did
they have to take out a president you're
absolutely right I have no confidence
that they're gonna get to the bottom of
this thing but that doesn't mean they
shouldn't try I mean I think if you're
in your business or you're in my
business you're a hopeless optimist why
don't you keep going out there and
writing stories every day and try to
tell the people what's going on in the
government if you don't believe that it
has you got to do it even just for its
own sake even if it doesn't result in
the truth ever essentially emerging
right four five scandals right now that
the Congress committees are looking into
right and they keep on looking into them
and they don't do a damn thing about it
well you've got your finger on a major
point which is one of them the key
reasons why Congress is so reluctant to
investigate this story is that to
investigate it and to find out the truth
will uncover the fact that a number of
committees and subcommittees of Congress
have been derelict in their duty in
terms of tracking exactly this set of
issues I think you have some high-level
members for instance of the iran-contra
committees who are not interested in
going back over the ground part of which
was covered by them because it will show
their own failures in that investigation
so I think that's part of the picture
another part of the picture of course is
partisanship the the fact that the
Republicans are not interested in
opening this this can of worms but
fundamentally it comes down to a matter
of will and what you write and the
documents I come up with and what
everyone else here talks about in writes
and puts out in the public domain either
will help generate enough momentum to
have an official investigation or it
won't call production information
bulletins given the track record of the
national security apparatus
and in with great professionalism in
destroying and disappearing documents
and other materials that relate to its
operations if you remember of course
Richard Nixon's own secretary with her
foot disappeared three minutes of
critical tape if you remember the fact
that during the iran-contra hearings Tom
Pogue our longtime CIA officer
acknowledged that massive numbers of
documents were not released to the
cavora provided to the committee my
point here is to suggest is it not in
order to - as we speak here today to go
to court to consider going to court to
get a court injunction that would lay
down the basis that the government
cannot disappear or destroy the relevant
documents that have been listed here
today as being needed I think it's a
very good idea priorities holding
sessions such as this one today is part
of the democratic process and the
people's right to know we've done this
for 22 years not as well as we'd like
but your participation the press
participation the American citizenry
concern about this issue is the way in
which Congress will respond without that
kind of national pressure and we're a
very small group even in this hearing
room today but we have the
responsibility and we have the
Democratic right to know and more
organizations more individuals clamoring
for democracy for knowledge the kind of
recommendations that what halper made in
this panel will provide the grist if you
will the ability to put some spine in
some of our congressmen and put the
responsibility where it belongs absent
that kind of pressure if we didn't do
even the thing we did in March of 73 I
don't know whether the Senate Select
Committee on Watergate would have ever
come to be the thing we didn't do by the
way in
Contra was to have an adequate public
hearing and an adequate demand and
pressure from our own group and to that
extent we plead guilty that we didn't do
enough and the press didn't do enough
and the people didn't do enough I have a
letter for Martha Lyman who was supposed
to be on the panel because I had
criticized author Lyman's handling of
his role in iran-contra and he says in a
letter that I have excusing himself from
coming to this because he had to go to a
Bar Association meeting on minorities we
wanted to present the questions that we
had to author Lyman today but it's an
aroused and concerned citizen Rhee it's
an aroused press if you will the media
has been on this only in a limited way
and Sarah McClendon and everybody else
should be on this we had people talking
why isn't it covered more adequately and
Hitchens isn't working on it and Killion
has been working on it and they've been
marginalized and Barbara hanukkah has
been working on it and the Christic
Institute has been working on it and
it's all well that's that left wing will
fringe group or that other group and
they're just rattling around again but
the American people if they know what's
going on if they hear what's going on
and they call their congressmen and say
as Butler Derek just said we have a
concern and then you will see more than
75 we don't have the atmosphere that we
had in 1973 and the concern that we had
i'm harvey wasserman author of a history
book called harvey washington's history
united states along those lines a group
of us will be meeting at two o'clock at
122 Maryland Avenue to make sure that
this story continues I want to take
strong issue with mr. Boozman or as a
fellow historian I think it's very clear
that had the hostages been released when
President Carter thought they were gonna
be released and have his deal gone
through that Carter would have won the
election I don't believe it was just a
Republican paranoia the polls showed it
and their polls Richard Wirth --lens
polls showed a shift of 10% in the
public opinion which was more
enough to give the election to Jimmy
Carter if the election was much closer
in 1980 than people remember in terms of
the popular vote I think it's also very
important when we discussed this event
to keep it in historical perspective
this is one of the major shaping events
of the 20th century there are very few
events you can point to that very
clearly turned the course of American
politics the assassination of John
Kennedy the manipulation in 1968 of the
Vietnamese thing and you really beyond
that you almost have to go all the way
back to the sinking of the Lusitania
which brought the United States into
World War one I bring that for a very
specific point when the when where drew
Wilson was president in 1915 of our vast
majority of the United States opposed
getting into World War one and the
Germans sank the luxury liner to the
Lusitania charging that it was carrying
British arms from New York to London the
British strongly denied it and Woodrow
Wilson went along with them seventy
years later
deep-sea divers went down to the
Lusitania and in fact found many tons of
weapons that were going from the United
States to Great Britain so it may very
well be that the United States got into
World War one on the basis of a lie and
World War one was a major shaping event
in American history there's absolutely
no doubt about that we now have a
situation in 1980 where with the
American public had a choice between a
moderate Liberal Democrat and an extreme
right-wing Republican we all know what
happened in the 1980s and we all I think
can take go back and look and take
strong questioning about what the 1980s
might have looked like had Jimmy Carter
been reelected as opposed to Ronald
Reagan the world would have been very
different not only in the 1980s but
probably for an entire generation to
come so I think it's very important that
people keep in perspective the enormity
of the impact of what we're talking
about here this was not a small event
and I think a miss McClendon's point is
very well taken we in no way shape or
form can trust the congressional
investigation a congressional
investigation cannot be an end to this
situation will not be a major victory if
Congress decides to investigate this
deal in 1980 because a
- the historical impact there is as I
think you'll agree no precedent for a
strong case that can be made against a
sitting president for having committed
treason and essentially we are talking
about treason here the idea of an
opposition campaign negotiating Subrosa
with a foreign government for to delay
the release of hostages if that isn't
treason I don't know what is and we're
talking about the current and the former
president of the United States involved
here there is really nothing of that
magnitude in the history of this country
and I hope people will keep that in mind
as we proceed because it really Dwarfs
anything that I think this Congress or
any future Congress in many ways any
pass Congress is probably willing to
deal with I think mr. Papp urn is
exactly right that people as a whole are
gonna have to deal with this issue
ultimately I'd like to ask Marcus Raskin
to to expound a bit more on the point
that you were making it seems that the
point that you're making is
fundamentally more profound than that
which is being acknowledged by most of
the speakers and questioners that that
whereas most of the people are talking
about some element in the Republican
Party establishing negotiations somehow
with a foreign power to win a particular
election your point at least if I heard
it correctly is fundamentally different
that this was in fact a counter strike
against the entire concept of democratic
government in the United States by
elements of a national security state
that had been formulated since 1947 the
passage of the National Security Act now
if that is the constitutional reality
that we're dealing with it seems to me
that we have to define it properly in
order to define the nature of what the
congressional investigation has to be
here could you in fact clarify your
point and am i right and hearing what
you're saying I think you are right I
think there are two elements to it the
first element is that starting with the
end and here professor Beisner will know
far more than I but start starting with
the end
of the Second World War it was taken for
granted that the United States could
intervene in other people's elections
now we had of course done that
consistently in South America and in
Latin America but what we needed at that
point in the in the early in the early
in late 1940s was a new apparatus and
that apparatus was one which assumed
that we were running a worldwide Empire
and called the free world you can call
what you want but the assumption was
that there were things that we could do
which were so-called legitimated because
we had power but there was no real
internal legitimation in the country for
those things the legitimation really
didn't come from Congress except in the
most broad way the note for example
there is no place in the laws which says
that covert operations should be
conducted by a part of the American
government yet it's the case that covert
operations go on and the meaning of
covert operations in fact is that you're
breaking the law of another country
that's why you do it covertly you're
trying to get their secrets you're
trying you're doing all sorts of of
things whether blackmail or secrets or
you know whatever it is that's why
you're conducting a covert operation on
that level and also you're conducting it
because you don't want to go through
Congress because it would be publicly
debated within the United States and
indeed in that sense the elitist notion
is that a small grouping of people know
better than others that this is the way
things should go on and these are this
is the way a politics should be
conducted in an international sense now
that has come to be known as the
legitimate way of doing business in
American society over the 40-year period
and I would argue that that's
illegitimate that that inset that itself
that national security state apparatus
has to be dismantled now in the context
of that illegitimate system came another
illegitimate system and that
illegitimate system was and came at
various stages groupings of people who
went out on their own to do various
sorts of enterprises which you know very
well about other groupings of people
organizing businesses proprietaries for
the CIA to be used as fronts for other
activities of the CIA as if they were
business individual businessmen not
responsible to the CIA but beyond that
came to be something which occurred in
1980 which is so profound and that is
the return of the possible fixing of an
American election now subjectively from
the point of view of Cayce his view is
look Carter is an interloper he tried to
get rid and indeed was successful at
getting rid of part of the CIA
Stansfield Turner is an interloper
although God knows he isn't but but
indeed that is the perspective that
Cayce was taking an indeed Cayce was a
man who had been involved with secret
operations since the Second World War
and since the OSS since the OSS days so
his perspective is look these people
have indeed disturbed the orderly way of
doing business by the United States over
this period of time they were indeed in
the 1980s if Carter had his way who
knows what might emerge with regard to
the CIA there was indeed under Carter
much heavier controls over covert
operations as you know as soon as Casey
came in
with Reagan they removed the controls
over the covert operations there had
been a committee established in the
Oversight Committee established in the
White House which no longer had that
particular oversight responsibility over
covert operations so a very great deal
changed at that point now what does this
mean
it means that in effect you have a
governing structure which is
illegitimate which uses either the
Republic or the democracy the rhetoric
of democracy or Republic but operates on
its own and it operates in a framework
of a controlled legitimacy that is self
enforced legitimacy indeed various
people here have been part of it
Halperin had been part of it I had been
part of it
SiC have been part of it and it operates
in the context of rules and regulations
which are self-imposed but they're not
responsive to Congress per se or to the
public per se that system has in my view
to be dismantled secondarily came out of
that system a criminal system and the
criminal system is the one that we're
talking about here which now goes to the
point of can you not only fix other
people's elections but can you fix the
elections at home in that sense I think
Wasserman's comments are very important
I'm not here to talk about traitorous
activity of the president nor do I do I
know enough to even begin to make such a
charge but it is clear that elections
over the course of a 40 year period have
been fixed by the United States abroad
and that those people who undertake to
do that abroad have no problems doing
that at home
the president of the Washington Post
company mrs. Katherine Graham made her
post iran-contra pilgrimage to Langley
in November of 1988 and stated in a
speech there that democracy flourishes
when government can keep its secrets
quite to the frontline program referred
to mr. Angelo Cota via who is the Senate
Select Committee on Intelligence staff
member referred to anonymously here
previously declared thereon and was
identified as an informal consultant to
the Republican campaign committee and in
fact did deliver from his privileged
position information to that committee
that's a heavy duty felony to which he
has openly admitted has any prosecution
gone forward as any chart been made
against him point three and the my last
one with regard to secrecy there is
currently a private lawsuit underway in
federal court in Baltimore
Maxwell versus First National Bank of
Maryland this case involves they will
not go into the details some charges
relating to a CIA front company which
was a client of that Bank the plaintiff
mr. Maxwell in his private suit for
damages against the bank for wrongful
discharge was in charge of that account
in late December the Justice Department
that oxymoron presented an affidavit
signed by the Director of Central
Intelligence mr. William Webster in
support of its motion that mr. Maxwell a
private citizen who had never entered
into an official relationship with the
United States never sign any secrecy
agreement by reason of the doctrine of
absolute state secrecy is to be
prevented at any time in this proceeding
from referring to Associated traders
corporation to the Justice Department to
the FBI or to the CIA for fear of grave
danger to the national security of the
United States these three points I
submit to you illustrate where we are on
a very direct important and human level
thank you I had a question for Tom
Blanton I think would be best on the
congressional investigation and and that
is what evidence is there beyond the
assurances that Butler Derek gave this
morning and the 75 signers of this
letter that that this quasi grand jury
proceeding is really taking place that
that something serious is happening on
the part of the Democratic leadership I
mean who who is the staff in charge how
many staff people are working on this
what are they doing what letters have
been written what request had been made
to the to the administration to a Mesa
in California to the other other types
of Records that you've talked about do
you do you see or hear of any of that
being done on any sort of timetable and
I guess a related question on the Senate
side is there any indication at this
point that the Intelligence Committee in
the work up to the gates nomination
hearings plan to pursue any of these
issues in that forum
to answer your first question I really
can't answer it you have to ask
congressman Derrick I'm not privy to
those discussions I've not attended any
of those meetings
I couldn't even name all that you know
what committees have have contributed
staff to this this operation but you
should check with the House leadership
in you know I'm sure you have much
better sources on the hill than I do on
the on this the answers to those sorts
of questions are quite vague and they're
not reassuring to to I guess to a
reporter that something is happening and
and I think perhaps Butler Derrick may
have conveyed a different impression
when he talked about a grand jury
proceeding that that there's something
is this that's really going on here yeah
you certainly conveyed a different
impression I hadn't heard before which
is why I remarked on it and I would
recommend that you talk to him the
notion that in two weeks they would
decide is I think news on the second
question I have no indications about
what the Senate Intelligence Committee
is or is not looking into just some
references in the media that four or
five staff members are working full time
compiling a briefing book on gates we've
compiled one at the National Security
Archive everyone's welcome to come get a
copy of what charge you for it but
that's to cover our costs but I have no
notion other than that about what
they're looking into yes Barbara
Honegger the author of October Surprise
I what I'd like to add here are some
very specific data some facts people ask
me where are the smoking guns and we've
Tom Blanton has listed a number of the
documents that need to be subpoenaed in
the kinds of documents in the kinds of
sources that need subpoena once we get
subpoena power whether it's in a class
action suit which is my hope frankly on
the part of the 52 hostages are some
good subsets of them or whether there's
a congressional hearing or investigation
with subpoena power and under oath
testimony just a couple of the
highlights and I'm on the record going
to say here that while I'm in Washington
over the next two days I am going to
compile from my own five-year research
and being the author of the only book on
this subject which I have available here
for those
would like to see it published in 1989
and I should add that the day my book
was published May 12th 1989 the Bush
Justice Department chose to sue one of
the key witnesses self-proclaimed
eyewitnesses Richard brenneke on that
precise date that is not a coincidence
my book is important and you should read
it now in the book there are references
to a number of smoking guns and in the
three years since I have written the
book I have on a daily basis continued
this research full-time just some tips
of the iceberg of some of these smoking
guns half of which are contained in the
book in half of which or not I pledge
here that I will make a list of all 37
of them there are audio tapes we know
where they are we they have to be
subpoenaed and I will make that list
available to the individuals in the
Congress that I happen to personally
know including Spencer Oliver the chief
counsel of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee including mr. Robert
Torricelli and his assistant
Rick Frost including including mr.
Butler Derek and his assistant Michael
Harrison who is here today and a whole
list of the individuals I have been
assured are actually working on this
quote grand-jury unquote they will have
this list of smoking guns before I leave
Washington on Saturday and this list of
smoking guns I will make available to
the press in whatever way I can
if and only if the decision is made by
this so-called staff-level
investigation in the House of
Representatives not to go forward with
subpoena power then I will make the full
list available to the press and as you
will see in a moment the problem with
the dilemma in the trade-off of making
the fullest available to the press now
is that people have a way of dying very
quickly if they know something the
epilogue to my book which I call a
kinder gentler nation is a list of some
30 individuals who have either been
assassinated assassination attempts on
their life and I add in that list mr.
brenneke himself also who shang la vie
now deceased who is the self
acknowledged individual and Iranian arms
dealer who has
said that on videotape in an interview
that I arranged for him that he
personally was at the October 2nd
meeting that Richard Allen Lawrence
Silberman the judge who has now let
Oliver North off the hook
not coincidentally and also mr. Robert
McFarlane not coincidentally later at
the center of iran-contra these three
men have acknowledged publicly having
been at the October 2nd 1980 meeting in
the elephant Plaza Hotel with they say
an Iranian maybe an Egyptian well that
man has come forward his name is who
Shang La Vie there were two attempts on
his life he is now deceased from a heart
attack I presume that that was of
natural causes but just some examples of
the highlights of the smoking guns that
are going to be on the list of 37 that I
will give to these members of the staff
level investigation the surprising one
that has not yet been mentioned here
today was actually mentioned on the
macneil/lehrer Newshour on November 7th
1986 by none other than Richard Allen
himself one of the participants at the
meeting with mr. who Shang La Vie on
October 2nd 1980 that October 2nd 1980
meeting is one of the hard data points
that we have and mr. Allen Silberman and
McFarlane wants you to believe that
nothing happened there I have a
tape-recorded interview with mr. Ari Ben
Manoj whom we know was a former Israeli
intelligence agent who was in a position
to know at the time later a top
assistant to Prime Minister Shamir
himself he is right now as I'm speaking
to you in Australia writing a book on
October Surprise for release in five
languages in this November 1991 so it
will not be long before his entire story
is out in his own words however in the
tape recorded interview with him I have
the transcript in my possession with me
here today he has stated that to his
personal knowledge as part of what he
called the aura group in Israel six
members were critical in that group
there was a total of approximately 92
billion dollars in US and other Western
arms that were brokered by the Israelis
to Iran over the period of the iran-iraq
war we are talking about twice
entire estimated forty billion dollars
that it costs the United States and all
of our allies to fight the recent
Porsche and Gulf War
now this mr. re-bend Menasha is very
important he is also in a tape-recorded
interview with me stated that he was
personally present at this hard fact
October 2nd 1980 meeting with Allen
Silberman and mcFarland and he has
stated in a taped interview with me that
mr. who shang la vie now deceased two
assets two assassination attempts
against his life was working for mr. re
been manoj an israeli intelligence at
the time mr. who sang la vie happened to
be Jewish and Iranian mr. Ari been manoj
happens to be Jewish and born in Iran
and you will see in the revised edition
of my book that this is a very important
connection the Jewish Iranian connection
in any case the tip of the iceberg in
terms of a hard data point that we need
to subpoena is that this very man
richard allen who we know is at this
meeting and mr. re been manoj has also
now identified the two iranians who are
at the meeting that who shang la vie
would not name for me except to say one
of them was a doctor i had asked him is
it doctor cyrus Hashemi he said no I
guarantee you it is not now mr. La Vie
is deceased but mr. re been manoj has
now stated on tape that the individual
the doctor at the elephant Plaza Hotel
meeting with Allen Silberman mcFarland
and according to Ben manoj been manoj
himself and Lavi was a doctor
Gomes che gh om s hei who I have checked
with mr. Bani Sadr who is the former
President of Iran he has checked that he
came back to me through his translator
his English translator one week ago in
writing and he said that mr. Gomes che
dr. Gomes a is a very important figure
who is close to mr. maiik ishani
well mr. Kashani is also in my tape
recorded interview with mr. re Ben Manoj
as having been mr. Arvind Minaj's number
one core contact inside Iran for the
arms for hostages deals so this is a
critical meeting it's not what richard
allen said I happen to disagree with
Martin Killian that he agrees with
Richard Allen I do not believe Richard
Allen I think that it was a very
important substance
meaning I do not believe that it just
happened in the lobby there were at
least five or six individuals that we
can identify already as acknowledging
having been present and as a result of
that meeting there were certain
understandings that were made Richard
Allen a participant in this hard fact
October 2nd 1980 meeting with La Vie and
presumably also been Manoj and dr. Gong
chay of Iran and gong shades aid who is
still not identified by name this same
Richard V Allen on the macneil/lehrer
Newshour on November 7 1986 stated to a
nationwide television television
audience that he Richard Allen then the
first national security adviser to
President Reagan on Reagan's first full
day in office that was January 21st 1981
that he Allen turned to Reagan
presumably in the Oval Office there
somewhere close there in the White House
certainly and said Mr Reagan there's a
53rd hostage or a 54th hostage who is
still being held in Iran her name is
Cynthia Dwyer and she happens to be the
wife of one of my former college buddies
well mr. Allen put out on macneil-lehrer
that the President of the United States
Ronald Reagan turned to him on January
21st 1981 and said you call or let us
call the Iranians call Iran and tell
them that the deal is off unless she is
also released well there is a tape
recording in the White House Situation
Room basement made of all calls to
foreign officials especially heads of
state could I ask you you've got very
important things to say and they're
people who want to talk with you about
it but we have a few minutes and there
are a few more questions with your
indulgence question here thank you my
name is Robert
Robert Bohm from the fund for new
priorities and also the Center for
Constitutional Rights the point I wish
to make is that to emphasize the
important constitutional aspects
discussed by Morten Halpern and to add a
further point and that is that the
operations of the CIA as they have
existed almost from the beginning are
themselves really unconstitutional
because the Constitution requires that
all appropriations made funds for the
government must be appropriated by
Congress and by nobody else and
according and must be revealed in the
budget
well actually the CIA operation is not
separate at all is not voted on
separately by the Congress but is
consists of monies given to the CIA by
various other agencies so there is no
real way in which the Congress can even
know how much the the CIA has been
getting as a matter of fact at one time
senator Kennedy venture to guess that it
ran perhaps five billion dollars
actually the the funds expended for the
CIA and other intelligence agencies now
have been publicly admitted to be
approximately thirty billion dollars now
this continuing a violation of the
Constitution is something that invites I
think the attention of legal scholars
actually it was presented in court in a
very well known case Harrington against
the against the government congressman
Michael Harrington raised this issue and
brought it to the attention of the
courts unfortunately the Circuit Court
of Appeals in I believe in Massachusetts
ruled that he did not have standing to
sue it's really hard to justify a
decision of that kind because it would
seem to me that
congressman has every important interest
in knowing how the funds that the
Congress votes are expended but the
court held against him on it and other
constitutional lawyers were afraid to
bring the matter to the Supreme Court
because they were afraid that it would
also give it a a a bad decision however
I think the issue is still very much
alive and I think it's something that
should be investigated and that it
should play a role in the deliberations
of people who want to bring out prevent
secrecy in government time for one more
question all right you know well I think
that brings us to an end and I want to
thank our panelists who have spoken here
today in very different ways they have
made a plea for a formal investigation
to be made by an appropriate committee
of Congress particularly concerning
charges made in connection with the
so-called October Surprise the panelists
have outlined what they know what they
don't know and what needs to be known
they've also given us some sense of the
constitutional issues the historical
context and some sense of the practical
politics involved and from what we've
heard today it it seems to me that the
charges and allegations by any
reasonable standard are very serious
they affect the reputation and integrity
of some of our leaders of both parties
our government and its processes and I
am sure that most Americans want to
believe in the integrity and openness of
its leaders its government and its
processes I certainly do
but these allegations are so serious
that they deserve to be examined the
truth or falsity of them determined and
the necessary judgments made in a fair
just and thorough and authoritative way
and the Congress is an appropriate way
to do that
thank you I'd also like to close with a
vote of gratitude to the staff who
worked so hard in preparing this we have
our West Coast director David marks we
had Washington staff in the form of
robert van Devere and bill anderson and
all the other members of the fund i want
to thank the panelists
I want to thank Morehead Kennedy and
Barry Rosen and the other hostages for
the role that they've continued to play
in a very important democratic process
as I said before we will have a
follow-up
in the form of video tapes available
this is the commercial part the fund for
new priorities is a tax-exempt
educational organization we raise money
from the people and we need help to
distribute the materials to hold these
conferences any contributions should be
sent to the fund at 171 Madison Avenue
New York 1 / 1 6 our office in
Washington is at 202 675 to 3 to 9 I
would also like to add a correction or
an apology to a Barbara Cohen who called
somewhat furious with a statement I made
earlier a statement in the detected
clarification of my remarks is that she
was not able or she did not feel
comfortable with moderating this panel
today and I said that I would make such
a statement as a clarification of the
remarks that I made earlier in the day
you would have to call her with regard
to that I got this by telephone message
I'm making the apology public she said
she'd come down here and what was their
statement oh and I can't recall make a a
condemnatory statement for what my
earlier remarks I'm trying to clarify
them to the extent that I know I miss
and screwed them or misrepresented them
in any event I want also to call your
attention to the fact that
macneil-lehrer and tonight will have I
think a few of our panelists
participating in the macneil-lehrer our
we I think have been taped I know we've
been taped by c-span so I know we'll
have the videotapes available I think we
were covered by other networks in to the
extent that we have other materials
available we will do so we will also
have an edited transcript and again
thank you for coming ladies and
gentlemen very much
[Applause]
[Music]